Journals & Books
Help
Search
My account
Sign in
Access through your institution
Purchase PDF
Article preview
Abstract
Introduction
Section snippets
References (55)
Food Research International
Available online 14 July 2024, 114759
In Press, Journal Pre-proof
What’s this?
Effect of ozone oxidation on gastrointestinal digestion and absorption characteristics of silver carp (Hypophthalmichthys molitrix) surimi gels in vitro
Author links open overlay panel
Shuning Cao a 1
,
Yuping Pan a 1
,
Wendong Zheng a
,
Shengjun Chen b
,
Tao Yin a c
,
Ru Liu a c
,
Juan You a c
Show more
Add to Mendeley
Share
Cite
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foodres.2024.114759
Get rights and content
Highlights
•
In vitro simulated digestion and kinetic fitting of surimi gels with different levels of ozone oxidation were performed
•
Dry matter digestibility, peptide content and free amino acid content were in line with the logistic kinetic model (R2 = 0.95–0.99).
•
Rinsing with ozonated water (8 mg/L and 26 mg/L) could promote the digestion of surimi gels.
•
As ozonated water concentration increased, the rod of myosin released more peptides which was the main digestive area.
Abstract
To investigate the quality of different ozone-oxidized surimi gels and their in vitro digestion and absorption characteristics, surimi rinsed with different concentrations of ozonated water (0, 8, 26 mg/L) were prepared. Then, the degree of oxidation and gel structure of surimi were determined, the in vitro digestion and absorption of the gel were simulated, and the digestion and absorption products were analyzed by LC-MS/MS. The results showed that the quality of surimi gel was improved after proper ozone oxidation. After ozone water rinsing, the dry matter digestibility, peptide, and amino acid content increased, and the changes of all three were in line with the Logistic kinetic model (R2 = 0.95–0.99). Caco-2 cell absorption experiments showed that the absorption rate of peptides and amino acids decreased after ozone water rinsing. In summary, ozone oxidation can promote the digestion of surimi gel, but it also reduces the absorption of peptides and amino acids by Caco-2 cells. This study provides a reference for the application of ozone in the food field.
Graphical abstract
Download: Download high-res image (196KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Introduction
Surimi products are important aquatic processed products with the characteristics of high protein, low fat, and high nutritional value. Surimi products was popular with more and more consumers, and in 2022, the output of surimi products in China has reached 1.3548 million tonnes (B.o.F., 2022). In general, marine fish are excellent raw materials for the preparation of surimi while with the decline of global marine fish stock production and the increase in the cost of marine fishing, freshwater fish has been considered as a potential alternative resource (Chen et al., 2020). However, during the production of freshwater surimi, there are issues such as low whiteness and a strong fishy odor. Rinsing is a crucial step in surimi production and processing. It can effectively eliminate lipids and water-soluble proteins from fish meat, thereby enhancing surimi quality (Park, Graves, Draves, & Yongsawatdigul, 2013). Research showed that rinsing surimi with ozone water can effectively eliminate the fishy odor and enhance its color (Jiang et al., 2017). Additionally, ozone water rinsing was found to significantly improve the color and organoleptic quality of surimi gels (C. Liu et al., 2021b). Furthermore, surimi gels rinsed with ozone water exhibit better gel strength and water retention capacity (C. Liu et al., 2021a), indicating the great potential of ozone in surimi production and processing.
Ozone has a strong oxidizing effect and can react with proteins, leading to oxidation of the protein-peptide backbone, breakage of peptide bonds, cross-linking of proteins, and modification of amino acid side chains (Uzun, Ibanoglu, Catal, & Ibanoglu, 2012). Some studies found that oxidation is able to promote gastrointestinal digestion. Fang et al. (2022) found that an increase in the degree of cross-linking could promote the release of polypeptides after gastrointestinal digestion of surimi gels. Y. Yin, Xing, and Zhang (2023) found that moderate oxidation could improve the digestibility of bovine myofibrillar protein. However, some scholars found that protein oxidation could alter amino acids within specific recognition sites of digestive enzymes or induce cross-linking and aggregation of proteins, thereby masking digestive enzyme recognition sites and leading to reduced digestibility (Duque-Estrada et al., 2019). At present, there is still a great controversy about the sensitivity of oxidized proteins to proteolytic enzymes and their effect on digestibility. Ozone oxidation was targeted, and the effects of ozone on amino acids were tyrosine > cysteine > histidine > proline in order of easy to difficult (Fang et al., 2021). Therefore, different degrees of ozone oxidation might cause different digestion behaviors and outcomes. There have been no reports on this point. Meanwhile, if oxidation can affect the digestibility of proteins in food, the absorption of the corresponding amino acids in the human body and their bioavailability will also be affected (Soladoye, Juárez, Aalhus, Shand, & Estévez, 2015). However, little research has been reported on this. Therefore, it is necessary to study the effect of oxidation on the quality of protein in food and its gastrointestinal digestion and absorption characteristics.
In this study, the surimi was rinsed with different concentrations of ozone water (0, 8, 26 mg/L) to study the effect of ozone treatment on the quality of surimi and surimi gels. By measuring the dry matter digestibility, peptide, and amino acid content, and fitting the kinetic model, the effects of ozone treatment on the in vitro digestion of surimi gels were investigated. At the same time, the Caco-2 monolayer cell model was used to analyze the effect of ozone oxidation on the in vitro absorption of surimi gels. Combined with LC-MS/MS to analyze the digestion and absorption products, the effect of ozone oxidation on the digestion and absorption characteristics of surimi gels was further explained. The results of this study could provide a reference for the production of high-quality and high-nutrition surimi products.
Section snippets
Materials
Fresh live silver carp (Hypophthalmichthys molitrix, weight of 2.0–2.5 kg) were purchased from Huazhong Agricultural University Farmers' Market (Wuhan, China), and transported to the laboratory alive in an oxygenated container. The live carp were instantly stunned by a blow to the head. Then, the sacrificed fish was beheaded, scaled, eviscerated, filleted, and washed. The aforementioned procedures followed the research protocols approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee of
The degree of ozone oxidation of surimi
Fig. 1a and b showed carbonyl content of surimi proteins increased significantly and the total sulfhydryl content decreased significantly with the increase of ozonated water concentration (p < 0.05), which indicated that rinsing of surimi with different concentrations of ozonated water caused significant changes in the degree of oxidation of surimi proteins. This result was consistent with the findings of Jiang et al. (2017). Protein carbonylation is an irreversible oxidative stress and damage
Conclusion
The results showed that the quality of surimi gel was improved after proper ozone water rinsing, and the quality of surimi gel rinsed with 8 mg/L ozone water was the best. After ozone oxidation, the dry matter digestibility, peptide content, and free amino acid content increased, and all of them were in line with the logistic kinetic model (R2 = 0.95–0.99). As ozonated water concentration increased, the rod of myosin released more peptides which was the main digestive area. However, ozone
Uncited references
Lanier et al., 2013, Liu and Xiong, 2000, Soladoye et al., 2015, Yin and Park, 2014.
CRediT authorship contribution statement
Shuning Cao: Writing – original draft, Validation, Data curation. Yuping Pan: Writing – original draft, Software, Data curation. Wendong Zheng: Methodology, Data curation. Shengjun Chen: Resources, Funding acquisition. Tao Yin: Visualization, Conceptualization. Ru Liu: Visualization, Conceptualization. Juan You: Visualization, Conceptualization.
Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.
References (55)
G.H. Anderson et al.
Utilization of L-methionine sulfoxide, L-methionine sulfone and cysteic acid by the weanling rat
The Journal of Nutrition
(1976)
G.H. Anderson et al.
Effect of hydrogen peroxide treatment on the nutritional quality of rapeseed flour fed to weanling rats
J Nutr
(1975)
J.-L. Cuq et al.
Oxidation of methionine residues of food proteins and nutritional availability of protein-bound methionine sulphoxide
Food Chemistry
(1978)
M. Guo et al.
Changes in the myosin secondary structure and shrimp surimi gel strength induced by dense phase carbon dioxide
Food Chemistry
(2017)
P.R. Kiela et al.
Physiology of Intestinal Absorption and Secretion
Best Practice & Research Clinical Gastroenterology
(2016)
Y. Liu et al.
Protein oxidation-mediated changes in digestion profile and nutritional properties of myofibrillar proteins from bighead carp (Hypophthalmichthys nobilis)
Food Research International
(2023)
O. Lowry et al.
PROTEIN MEASUREMENT WITH THE FOLIN PHENOL REAGENT
Journal of Biological Chemistry
(1951)
X. Luo et al.
Differences in flavor characteristics of frozen surimi products reheated by microwave, water boiling, steaming, and frying
Food Chemistry
(2022)
C.S. Mesquita et al.
Simplified 2,4-dinitrophenylhydrazine spectrophotometric assay for quantification of carbonyls in oxidized proteins
Analytical Biochemistry
(2014)
A.S. Rahmanto et al.
Cellular effects of peptide and protein hydroperoxides
Free Radical Biology and Medicine
(2010)
View more references
Cited by (0)
1
Co-first author contributed equally to this work.
View full text
© 2024 Published by Elsevier Ltd.
Recommended articles
Progress in biomaterials inspired by the extracellular matrix
Giant, 2024, Article 100323
Zhuolin Chen, …, Yiting Lei
Geographical characterization of wines from seven regions of China by chemical composition combined with chemometrics: Quality characteristics of Chinese ‘Marselan’ wines
Food Chemistry: X, Volume 23, 2024, Article 101606
Yue Wang, …, Xiangyu Sun
Some contributions to Lagrangian modelling of power converters
Franklin Open, Volume 8, 2024, Article 100125
Mosaib Ul Munieeb, …, Shahkar Ahmad Nahvi
Show 3 more articles
About ScienceDirect
Remote access
Shopping cart
Advertise
Contact and support
Terms and conditions
Privacy policy
Cookies are used by this site.
Cookie Settings
All content on this site: Copyright © 2024 Elsevier B.V., its licensors, and contributors. All rights are reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. For all open access content, the Creative Commons licensing terms apply.
We use cookies that are necessary to make our site work. We may also use additional cookies to analyze, improve, and personalize our content and your digital experience. For more information, see ourCookie Policy
Cookie Settings
Accept all cookies