Skip to main content
HOMESUBMITFAQBLOGALERTS / RSSRESOURCESABOUTCHANNELS
Search for this keyword
Advanced Search
New Results
Follow this preprint
Profiling endogenous airway proteases and antiproteases and measuring proteolytic activation of Influenza HA using in vitro and ex vivo human airway surface liquid samples
Stephanie A Brocke, Boris Reidel, Camille Ehre, Meghan E Rebuli, Carole Robinette, Kevin D Schichlein, Christian A Brooks,
View ORCID Profile
Ilona Jaspers
doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.06.14.599031
This article is a preprint and has not been certified by peer review [what does this mean?].
0001001
AbstractFull TextInfo/HistoryMetrics
Preview PDF
Abstract
Imbalance of airway proteases and antiproteases has been implicated in diseases such as COPD and environmental exposures including cigarette smoke and ozone. To initiate infection, endogenous proteases are commandeered by respiratory viruses upon encountering the airway epithelium. The airway proteolytic environment likely contains redundant antiproteases and proteases with diverse catalytic mechanisms, however a proteomic profile of these enzymes and inhibitors in airway samples has not been reported. The objective of this study was to first profile extracellular proteases and antiproteases using human airway epithelial cell cultures and ex vivo nasal epithelial lining fluid (NELF) samples. Secondly, we present an optimized method for probing the proteolytic environment of airway surface liquid samples (in vitro and ex vivo) using fluorogenic peptides modeling the cleavage sites of respiratory viruses. We detected 48 proteases in the apical wash of cultured human nasal epithelial cells (HNECs) (n=6) and 57 in NELF (n=13) samples from healthy human subjects using mass-spectrometry based proteomics. Additionally, we detected 29 and 48 antiproteases in the HNEC apical washes and NELF, respectively. We observed large interindividual variability in rate of cleavage of an Influenza H1 peptide in the ex vivo clinical samples. Since protease and antiprotease levels have been found to be altered in the airways of smokers, we compared proteolytic cleavage in ex vivo nasal lavage samples from male/female smokers and non-smokers. There was a statistically significant increase in proteolysis of Influenza H1 in NLF from male smokers compared to female smokers. Furthermore, we measured cleavage of the S1/S2 site of SARS-CoV, SARS-CoV-2, and SARS-CoV-2 Delta peptides in various airway samples, suggesting the method could be used for other viruses of public health relevance. This assay presents a direct and efficient method of evaluating the proteolytic environment of human airway samples in assessment of therapeutic treatment, exposure, or underlying disease.
Competing Interest Statement
The authors have declared no competing interest.
Paper in collection COVID-19 SARS-CoV-2 preprints from medRxiv and bioRxiv
Copyright 
The copyright holder for this preprint is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license.
Back to top
Previous
Next
Posted June 14, 2024.
Download PDF
Print/Save Options
Email
Share
Citation Tools
Get QR code
COVID-19 SARS-CoV-2 preprints from medRxiv and bioRxiv
Subject Area
Immunology
Subject Areas
All Articles
Animal Behavior and Cognition
Biochemistry
Bioengineering
Bioinformatics
Biophysics
Cancer Biology
Cell Biology
Clinical Trials*
Developmental Biology
Ecology
Epidemiology*
Evolutionary Biology
Genetics
Genomics
Immunology
Microbiology
Molecular Biology
Neuroscience
Paleontology
Pathology
Pharmacology and Toxicology
Physiology
Plant Biology
Scientific Communication and Education
Synthetic Biology
Systems Biology
Zoology
* The Clinical Trials and Epidemiology subject categories are now closed to new submissions following the completion of bioRxiv's clinical research pilot project and launch of the dedicated health sciences server medRxiv (submit.medrxiv.org). New papers that report results of Clinical Trials must now be submitted to medRxiv. Most new Epidemiology papers also should be submitted to medRxiv, but if a paper contains no health-related information, authors may choose to submit it to another bioRxiv subject category (e.g., Genetics or Microbiology).



We use cookies on this site to enhance your user experience. By clicking any link on this page you are giving your consent for us to set cookies.
Continue Find out more