Journals & Books
Help
Search
My account
Sign in
Access through your institution
Purchase PDF
Article preview
Abstract
Introduction
Section snippets
References (29)
Science of The Total Environment
Volume 946
, 10 October 2024, 174108
Characterization of VOCs emissions and associated health risks inherent to the packaging and printing industries in Shandong Province, China
Author links open overlay panel
Ledong Zhu a
,
Xu Guan b
,
Jiao Li c
,
Yanbo Peng a b
,
Xin Zhang d
,
Anbao Gong b
,
Miaomiao Li a
,
Huan Xie b
,
Shurui Chen b
,
Jie Li a
,
Haolin Wang a
,
Qingzhu Zhang a
,
Wenxing Wang a
Show more
Add to Mendeley
Share
Cite
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2024.174108
Get rights and content
Highlights
•
Latest investigation into VOCs emission and health risks of typical packaging and printing enterprises in Shandong, China.
•
116 VOCs from three categories of packaging and printing industries were measured.
•
Experiments and calculations offer extensive data support for regional VOCs pollution control and occupational health risks.
•
Evaluated worker health risks, including cancer risks, non-cancer risks, and endocrine-disrupting properties.
Abstract
Comprehensive volatile organic compounds (VOCs) emission control is imperative to decreasing occupational health risks and environmental impact of the packaging and printing industries. In this work, we investigated the VOCs emission characteristics and concentrations of individual contaminants generated by the packaging and printing industries, with regard to various categories, processes, and geographic regions. VOCs emissions, ozone formation potential (OFP), and associated health risks were assessed at 10 representative packaging and printing firms across several cities in Shandong Province, China. Plastic packaging enterprises had the greatest levels of unorganized VOCs emissions, consisting predominantly of oxygenated volatile organic compounds (OVOCs), followed by alkanes and halocarbons. From metal and paper packaging enterprises, OVOCs, alkanes, and aromatics were significant components of unorganized VOCs emissions. Aromatics, halocarbons, and OVOCs contributed significantly to OFP in workshops. The potential carcinogenic risk associated with VOCs in the packaging and printing industries was not significant. However, according to the findings in this study, the workshop environment may provide a comparatively elevated non-carcinogenic risk attributable to ethyl acetate, isopropanol, acrolein, 1,1,2-Trichloroethane, 1,2-Dichloropropane, and naphthalene exposure. In particular, the endocrine-disrupting and genetic toxic effects caused by benzene, toluene, styrene, and naphthalene should not be overlooked. Thus, it is essential to provide precedence to the working environment conditions of workshop laborers, while also undertaking scientific and systematic measures to mitigate the detrimental impacts of VOCs on the environment and human welfare.
Graphical abstract
Download: Download high-res image (123KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Introduction
Increasing activity in the industrial sector has led to the progressive rise in the concentration of volatile organic compounds (VOCs) globally. The sources of VOCs in the atmosphere include both natural and anthropogenic sources (Carpenter et al., 2007; Kansal, 2009). Anthropogenic sources come from traffic emissions, industrial sources, landfill emissions, and volatile chemical products (VCPs) (Zhu et al., 2021). With the changes in the global energy structure and the rapid decline of VOCs emissions from motor vehicles, the contribution of VCPs to VOCs emissions cannot be ignored (Coggon et al., 2021; Lewis et al., 2020; Liang et al., 2023; McDonald et al., 2018). Notably, the printing industry predominantly utilizes VCPs as primary and ancillary materials, resulting in the substantial release of VOCs into the atmosphere. VOCs emissions from China's printing industry contributed to approximately 10 % of the overall VOCs emissions generated by industrial sources (Alabdulhadi et al., 2019; Jiang et al., 2020; Liang et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2023; Pongboonkhumlarp and Jinsart, 2022; Song et al., 2022). China's printing industry has experienced significant expansion, becoming the fourth-largest printing market in the world, after the United States, Japan, and the European Union (Yang et al., 2012). In China, VOCs emissions from packaging and printing industries exhibit distinct regional characteristics, and in some locations, unregulated VOCs emissions are severe. VOCs emissions from plastic packaging printing are particularly prominent, accounting for 70 % of the total VOCs emissions from packaging printing. According to China Packaging Federation data, in 2022, China's plastic packaging production reached 12.7 million tons, and it is projected to reach 13.3 million tons in 2023. By 2026, China's plastic packaging production is expected to increase to 15.3 million tons. There are over 100,000 paper packaging enterprises, primarily concentrated in coastal industrial belts.
The primary sources of VOCs emissions in the packaging and printing industries are the storage and transportation of raw materials; printing, drying, laminating, compounding, and coating processes; storage of hazardous waste containing VOCs; and storage of finished products (Kliopova-Galickaja and Kliaugaite, 2018; Nie, 2021; Sun et al., 2022; Zhang et al., 2022). Previous research has made significant strides in understanding VOCs emission characteristics, factors, and inventories in China's packaging and printing industry. VOCs emissions from China's printing industry have been systematically characterized over many years, and an emission inventory was established based on raw materials and processes through the material balance analysis method (Jiang et al., 2023; Liang et al., 2023). You et al. estimated VOCs emissions from the packaging and printing industries will be reduced by 46.5 % and 66.4 % by 2025 and 2030, respectively (You et al., 2023). Despite efforts to reduce VOCs, the processes involved in packaging and printing are complex, and the raw materials are diverse, making it challenging to accurately record regional emission inventories. Moreover, long-term occupational exposure to VOCs poses serious health risks to workers. Boggess reported the occupational exposure to VOCs inhalation among workers in Kuwait's printing industry. In particular, ethylbenzene, polyvinyl chloride, and benzyl chloride exposures are linked to the packing and printing work environment (Alabdulhadi et al., 2019). There is no carcinogenic risk involved in the packaging and printing enterprises workshops in Guangzhou Province, but the non-carcinogenic risk of xylene is extremely high (Feng et al., 2020).
Several researchers have assessed the occupational health risks of VOCs from industrial sources (Cui et al., 2020; Li et al., 2021; Mo et al., 2021), but there are few relevant studies on the packaging and printing industry. During China's extensive clean air campaign, VOCs emissions from the packaging and printing industry underwent significant changes; therefore, it is necessary to reevaluate the VOCs source components in this industry. Regional differences in VOCs emissions are attributed to differences in production materials, processes, and products, emphasizing the need to characterize VOCs emissions at the local level. Shandong Province, situated in the North China Plain, has made significant efforts to prevent and control air pollution. This province serves as a noteworthy example of China's relatively stringent regional regulations on pollution emissions. According to statistics provided by the environmental protection department of Shandong Province, the printing industry in Shandong Province has >8000 facilities, of which packaging printing enterprises account for approximately 60 %. Hence, analyzing the VOCs emissions from packaging and printing industries in Shandong Province provides the purpose of comprehending the present VOCs emission situation in this industry. In addition, it also provides an important reference for other provinces with less stringent air pollution control measures.
This study conducted field measurements to establish the VOCs characteristic composition spectrum on 10 representative packaging and printing companies in Shandong Province to evaluate VOCs emission characteristics and health risks. The variations in VOCs emissions were investigated and compared for three types of packaging and printing industries, including metal, plastic, and paper packaging. We identified VOCs compounds and their concentrations and compared these factors across the three types of packaging industries. In addition, we analyzed the potential of these VOCs to generate ozone and evaluated their impact on human health. The results of this study will enhance the understanding of VOCs emissions in China's packaging and printing industry. Moreover, it provides more comprehensive data to support pollution management efforts and address occupational health hazards.
Section snippets
Screening of packaging and printing companies
This study focuses on different packaging and printing industries in three cities in Shandong Province (Jinan, Qingdao, and Heze), as well as three groups, based on the materials used for packaging: plastic, paper, and metal packaging. The printing process can be categorized into three main types: gravure, letterpress, and planographic printing. As shown in Fig. S1, the pre-press section includes platemaking, can washing, and coating procedures. The printing section involves ink distribution
Unorganized VOCs emission
The emission pathway of VOCs is categorized into three sections: pre-press, printing, and post-press. The concentrations of VOCs in the packaging and printing workshops are presented in Fig. S2 and Table S3. Metal packaging manufacturers utilize several raw materials and auxiliary materials, including inks, paints, and varnishes, which contain VOCs. According to the actual operation conditions of enterprise A, sampling points were set up near the printing and coating processes in the printing
Conclusion
This study assessed the VOCs emissions from metal, plastic, and paper packaging enterprises in Shandong Province. The chemical compositions and concentrations of VOCs emissions from three types of packaging enterprises were determined, as well as their ozone formation potential capacity via the MIR method. Additionally, we evaluated the possible occupational health risks posed by unorganized VOCs emissions, considering both carcinogenic and non-carcinogenic effects. Plastic packaging
CRediT authorship contribution statement
Ledong Zhu: Writing – original draft, Formal analysis, Data curation, Conceptualization. Xu Guan: Project administration, Formal analysis. Jiao Li: Writing – review & editing, Formal analysis, Data curation. Yanbo Peng: Funding acquisition, Formal analysis, Writing – review & editing. Xin Zhang: Writing – review & editing. Anbao Gong: Project administration. Miaomiao Li: Formal analysis. Huan Xie: Formal analysis. Shurui Chen: Data curation. Jie Li: Data curation. Haolin Wang: Formal analysis.
Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.
Acknowledgements
The work was financially supported by National Natural Science Foundation of China (project No. 22236004, 42075106), Taishan Scholars (No. ts201712003), the Postdoctoral Applied Research Project of Qingdao and the Postdoctoral Innovation Project of Shandong Province.
References (29)
M.A. Bari et al.
Concentrations, sources and human health risk of inhalation exposure to air toxics in Edmonton
Canada. Chemosphere
(2017)
P. Cui et al.
VOCs emissions from asphalt pavement and health risks to construction workers
J. Clean. Prod.
(2020)
C. Jiang et al.
Emission factors and source profiles of volatile organic compounds from typical industrial sources in Guangzhou
China. Science of The Total Environment
(2023)
P. Jiang et al.
High-resolution emission inventory of gaseous and particulate pollutants in Shandong Province, eastern China
J. Clean. Prod.
(2020)
A. Kansal
Sources and reactivity of NMHCs and VOCs in the atmosphere: a review
J. Hazard. Mater.
(2009)
A.J. Li et al.
A review of environmental occurrence, toxicity, biotransformation and biomonitoring of volatile organic compounds
Environmental Chemistry and Ecotoxicology
(2021)
X. Liang et al.
Improved emission factors and speciation to characterize VOCs emissions in the printing industry in China
Sci. Total Environ.
(2023)
Y. Liu et al.
Characteristics, secondary transformation, and health risk assessment of ambient volatile organic compounds (VOCs) in urban Beijing
China. Atmospheric Pollution Research
(2021)
Y. Liu et al.
Characteristics and environmental and health impacts of volatile organic compounds in furniture manufacturing with different coating types in the Pearl River Delta
J. Clean. Prod.
(2023)
Z. Mo et al.
Volatile organic compound (VOCs) emissions and health risk assessment in paint and coatings industry in the Yangtze River Delta
China. Environmental Pollution
(2021)
View more references
Cited by (0)
View full text
© 2024 Published by Elsevier B.V.
Recommended articles
Comparative study of traditional and DNA-based methods for environmental impact assessment: A case study of marine aggregate extraction in the North Sea
Science of The Total Environment, Volume 946, 2024, Article 174106
Van den Bulcke Laure, …, Derycke Sofie
Triaxial-mechanical and permeability properties of coal body under varying CO pressures
Science of The Total Environment, Volume 946, 2024, Article 174261
Lipeng Chen, …, Zhipeng Liao
Enhanced breakage of the aggregates of nanoscale zero-valent iron via ball milling
Science of The Total Environment, Volume 946, 2024, Article 174399
Lei Li, …, Wei-xian Zhang
Show 3 more articles
About ScienceDirect
Remote access
Shopping cart
Advertise
Contact and support
Terms and conditions
Privacy policy
Cookies are used by this site.
Cookie Settings
All content on this site: Copyright © 2024 Elsevier B.V., its licensors, and contributors. All rights are reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. For all open access content, the Creative Commons licensing terms apply.
We use cookies that are necessary to make our site work. We may also use additional cookies to analyze, improve, and personalize our content and your digital experience. For more information, see ourCookie Policy
Cookie Settings
Accept all cookies