Your privacy, your choice
We use essential cookies to make sure the site can function. We, and our 209 partners, also use optional cookies and similar technologies for advertising, personalisation of content, usage analysis, and social media.
By accepting optional cookies, you consent to allowing us and our partners to store and access personal data on your device, such as browsing behaviour and unique identifiers. Some third parties are outside of the European Economic Area, with varying standards of data protection. See our privacy policy for more information on the use of your personal data. Your consent choices apply to springer.com and applicable subdomains.
You can find further information, and change your preferences via 'Manage preferences'.
You can also change your preferences or withdraw consent at any time via 'Your privacy choices', found in the footer of every page.
We use cookies and similar technologies for the following purposes:
Store and/or access information on a device
Personalised advertising and content, advertising and content measurement, audience research and services development
Accept all cookies
Reject optional cookies
Manage preferences
Skip to main content
Advertisement
Log in
Find a journal
Publish with us
Track your research
Search
Cart
Home European Journal of Medical Research Article
Comparing the effects of low-level laser therapy and gaseous ozone as a preventive measure on medication-related osteonecrosis of the jaws following tooth extraction: a rat model
Research
Open access
Published: 09 July 2024
Volume 29, article number 359, (2024)
Cite this article
Download PDF
You have full access to this
open access
article
European Journal of Medical Research
Aims and scope
Submit manuscript
Öznur Özalp, Oğuzcan Göksu, Havva Serap Toru, Mehmet Ali Altay & Alper Sindel 
229 Accesses
Explore all metrics
Abstract
Objectives
Use of numerous medications such as tyrosine kinase inhibitors (sunitinib), monoclonal antibodies (bevacizumab), fusion proteins (aflibercept), mTOR inhibitors (everolimus), radiopharmaceuticals (radium 223), selective estrogen receptor modulators (raloxifene), and immunosuppressants (methotrexate and corticosteroids) has been reported to be a risk factor for development of medication-related osteonecrosis of the jaws till date. This study aimed to evaluate the preventive effect of low-level laser therapy (LLLT) and gaseous ozone on the onset of MRONJ following tooth extraction.
Materials and methods
A total of 40 male Wistar rats were randomly allocated into 4 groups of 10 rats each. The groups laser (L), ozone (O), and control (C) received weekly intraperitoneal injections of zoledronic acid (0.06 mg/kg), while group sham (S) received saline solution for 4 weeks. After the 4th injection, all subjects underwent mandibular first molar extraction and adjunctive laser or ozone was applied according to the groups. All the rats were sacrificed at 4 postoperative weeks for comparative histomorphometric evaluation of bone healing in extraction sites.
Results
Laser and ozone groups demonstrated significantly higher bone formation compared to control group (p < 0.05), while no significant difference was found between laser and ozone groups (p = 1.00). Furthermore, the greatest bone formation was observed with the sham group (p < 0.05).
Conclusions
Findings of the current study support that adjunctive LLLT and ozone therapy following tooth extraction may help prevent MRONJ and improve bone healing in subjects under zoledronic acid therapy.
Clinical relevance
Since the introduction in 2003, great effort has been devoted to developing a certain management protocol for MRONJ. Several publications have appeared in recent years documenting promising results of adjunctive LLLT and ozone application in treatment of MRONJ. However, experimental data are limited on this regard and the present study, for the first time, aimed to evaluate and compare the effects of LLLT and ozone in prevention of MRONJ.
Similar content being viewed by others
Ozone therapy effect in medication-related osteonecrosis of the jaw as prevention or treatment: microtomographic, confocal laser microscopy and histomorphometric analysis
Article 16 February 2024
Low-level laser therapy prevents medication-related osteonecrosis of the jaw-like lesions via IL-1RA-mediated primary gingival wound healing
Article Open access
10 January 2023
Laser surgery in management of medication-related osteonecrosis of the jaws: a meta-analysis
Article 13 February 2020
Introduction
Medication-related osteonecrosis of the jaws (MRONJ) still presents a challenging complex disease with many questions remain unclear regarding its pathophysiology and proper management. A high incidence of drug-induced osteonecrosis of the jaw has been reported in patients using chronic and systemic antiresorptive drugs, mainly as a complication of surgical dental procedures or, in some cases, spontaneously. Till date, numerous families of medications such as tyrosine kinase inhibitors (sunitinib), monoclonal antibodies (bevacizumab), fusion proteins (aflibercept), mTOR inhibitors (everolimus), radiopharmaceuticals (radium 223), selective estrogen receptor modulators (raloxifene), and immunosuppressants (methotrexate and corticosteroids) have been implicated as risk factors for MRONJ [1, 2].
However, in the 2022 update of American Association of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgeons’ Position Paper on Medication-Related Osteonecrosis of the Jaws, only three main groups of antiresorptive drugs including bisphosphonates (BPs), denosumab and romosozumab have been reported to be associated with an increased risk for developing MRONJ [3]. Among these, BPs are the most famous major class of drugs for the treatment of various bone diseases [4]. BP therapy has proven to be one of the most effective ways to treat benign and malignant diseases characterized by high bone turnover, such as metastatic bone diseases, osteoporosis, Paget's disease, and pediatric osteogenesis imperfecta [5,6,7].
In the literature, there is no consensus on ideal management of MRONJ [8,9,10]. Treatment strategies mainly focus on minimizing the progression or formation of bone necrosis, eliminating pain, controlling infection, and optimizing the patient's quality of life [5, 8, 10]. For several years, great effort has been devoted on adjunctive therapies to prevent and manage MRONJ. Among them, several studies have reported promising results with the use of low-level laser therapy (LLLT) and ozone. It has been suggested that biostimulation through LLLT may be beneficial in MRONJ management to enhance bone healing by increasing osteoblast proliferation and differentiation, collagen type-I formation, and secretion of growth factors [11, 12].
In addition to LLLT, a few number of studies have been appeared recently claiming that ozone therapy may be utilized in MRONJ management due to its several biologic effects such as activation of neuroprotective systems, improvement of blood circulation and oxygen delivery, stimulation of immune modular system, and also prevention or treatment of infectious conditions due to its antibacterial, antiviral, and antifungal properties [13].
Despite this interest, experimental data are rather controversial and no one to the best of our knowledge has compared the effects of LLLT and ozone in prevention of MRONJ. The null hypothesis of the present study is local application of LLLT and gaseous ozone following tooth extraction have no positive effect on impaired bone healing under bisphosphonate medication. We therefore aimed to evaluate the preventive effect of low-level laser therapy and gaseous ozone on the onset of MRONJ following tooth extraction.
Material and methods
Animals and ethical approval
The regional animal research ethics committee (Akdeniz University, Antalya, Turkey) reviewed and approved the study protocol (B.30.2.AKD.0.05.07.00/97). All the procedures were carried out in compliance with the National Research Council’s Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals, the US Public Health Service’s Policy on Human Care and Use of Laboratory Animals, and the National Institutes of Health Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals.
Study design
This study was performed on healthy adult male Wistar rats with a mean weight of 300 g obtained from Akdeniz University Experimental Animals Application and Research Center. The subjects were left for a 1-week study period to get used to the laboratory conditions before the experiment. Throughout the study, the subjects were placed in appropriate cages under the control of a veterinarian, with 2 subjects in each cage. All subjects were fed a standard laboratory diet (rat chow and tap water). All rats were housed in cages in triplicate at 22 ± 2 °C, at 40–60% humidity, in a constantly warm and fresh air, in a cycle of 12 h of light and 12 h of darkness.
The sample size was calculated using the "G. Power-3.1.9.2" program with a 95% confidence level [14]. The subjects were randomly allocated into 4 groups of 10 rats each (laser-L, ozone-O, control-C, and sham-S). The groups L, O, and C received weekly intraperitoneal injections of zoledronic acid (0.06 mg/kg) according to the protocol described by Zandi et al., while the group S received saline solution for 4 weeks [15].
One-week after the last zoledronate or saline injection, all rats underwent mandibular first molar extraction under general anesthesia using intraperitoneal injection of 90 mg/kg of ketamine hydrochloride (Ketalar®; Eczacibasi®, Istanbul, Turkey) and 20 mg/kg of xylazine (Alfazyne 2%; EgeVet, Izmir, Turkey). Tooth extraction was performed using a molt periosteal elevator to detach the gingiva and then a forceps to dislocate the tooth (Fig. 1).
Fig. 1
Mandibular first molar extraction was performed in all rats using periosteal elevators and forceps
Full size image
Following the extraction, a gallium-aluminum-arsenide (Ga-Al-As) diode laser (Epic10; Biolase, Irvine, CA, USA) application performed to the 1st group (group L) with the following parameters: 808 nm wavelength, 0.5 W power, continuous wave, non-contact mode at 0.5–1 cm distance from the oral mucosa, spot size 0.28 cm2 (R = 6 mm), for 30 s, energy density of 5 J/cm2 (energy per point,1.4 J), and as completely cover the surgical area (Fig. 2). First application of laser was performed immediately after the surgery and repeated on 3rd, 5th, 7th, and 10th postoperative days [16].
Fig. 2
Ga-Al-As diode laser application following tooth extraction
Full size image
Ozone therapy was applied to the 2nd group (group O) using OzoneDTA device (OzoneDTA generator, APOZA, New Taipei, Taiwan) with 80% oxygen intensity for 30 s (Fig. 3). Similar to laser application, ozone was administered immediately after the surgery and repeated on 3rd, 5th, 7th, and 10th postoperative days [17].
Fig. 3
Ozone administration following tooth extraction
Full size image
Rats in control and sham groups did not receive any adjunctive therapy following the extraction. Postoperative medication included subcutaneous injection of 5 mg/kg of carprofen (Rimadyl; Pfizer, New York, NY) every 24 h for 5 days. At 4 postoperative weeks, the rats were sacrificed under general anesthesia by an intravenous (IV) overdose of thiopental sodium (150 mg/kg; Pental; IE Ulagay, Turkey). Figure 4 illustrates the timeline of the experimental design. Clinical examination was performed regarding the presence of bone exposure and intraoral/extraoral fistula.
Fig. 4
Timeline for the experimental design
Full size image
Histomorphometric analyses
The hemi-mandibles of the 40 rats were excised and immediately immersed in 10% buffered formalin for 48 h and decalcified with 10% nitric acid and 10% sodium citrate for 3 days. After decalcification, the specimens were embedded in paraffin blocks. Sections of 6 µm thickness were cut in sagittal section along the long axis of the extraction socket using a slicer, stained with hematoxylin and eosin. All slides were examined under a light microscope (Axioscope 2 Plus; Carl Zeiss Microscopy LLC, New York, NY) connected to a computerized digital camera (AxioCam MRc; Carl Zeiss Microscopy GmbH, Gottingen, Germany). Subsequently, digital images were obtained with a microscopic camera (AxioCam MRc; Carl Zeiss Microscopy GmbH) at different magnification settings by a blinded pathologist. Following manual delineation on the images of slices, areas of new bone formation were measured automatically in square micrometers using a software program (AxioVision, release 4.8.2(06-2010); Carl Zeiss MicroImaging GmbH, Jena, Germany) (Fig. 5). The analysis was repeated three times and the mean values were assigned to each slide to be used for statistical analysis. For standardization of the samples, the same tooth (mandibular first molar) of rats of approximately same age and body weight was extracted and an identical total number of slices were obtained from each mandible.
Fig. 5
Histomorphometric measurement of new bone formation under × 4 magnification. A Sample from laser group; regular new bone formation without necrosis or inflammation. B Sample from ozone group; regular new bone formation without necrosis or inflammation. C Sample from control group; partial bone formation is observed, marked area represents bone necrosis with empty osteocyte lacunae. D Sample from sham group; intense new bone formation areas are observed with no sign of necrosis or inflammation
Full size image
Statistical analysis
Descriptive statistics, including frequency, median, interquartile range, and percentage distributions, were used to analyze the data. Considering the small sample size, the Kruskal–Wallis test was performed, followed by Dunnett T3 post hoc analysis (differences were considered significant at p < 0.05) using IBM Corp. Released 2015. IBM SPSS Statistics for Macintosh, Version 23.0., Armonk, NY: IBM Corp.
Results
No rats were lost during the postoperative period. On clinical examination, the findings indicating impaired healing (e.g., mucosal ulceration, abscess, fistula formation, necrotic bone exposure) were found in 2 rats in