Access content directly
Documentation
EN
Sign in
HAL Portal insu
Search
Upload
Home
Browse
User's guide
Conference Papers Year : 2024
Tropospheric ozone distributions and trends from IASI and CrIS
Anne Boynard (1, 2) , Catherine Wespes (3) , Juliette Hadji-Lazaro (4) , Daniel Hurtmans (3) , Pierre-François Coheur (3) , Marie Doutriaux-Boucher (5) , Jaap Onderwaater (5) , Kevin W. Bowman (6) , Cathy Clerbaux (3, 4)
Show details
1 LATMOS - Laboratoire Atmosphères, Milieux, Observations Spatiales
2 Sté SPASCIA
3 SQUARES - Spectroscopy, Quantum Chemistry and Atmospheric Remote Sensing
4 TROPO - LATMOS
5 EUMETSAT - European Organisation for the Exploitation of Meteorological Satellites
6 JPL - Jet Propulsion Laboratory
Abstract
en
Assessing the long-term tropospheric ozone (O3) distribu_ons and trends is critical for understanding the impact of human activity and climate change on atmospheric chemistry. The tropospheric O3 budget derived from models and observations is in relatively good agreement according to the first Tropospheric Ozone Assessment Report (TOAR). This report shows an increase in ozone in the troposphere, with regional variations observed. Satellite observations can complement in situ measurements and provide a regional to global view of ozone trends. However, uncertainties persist as to the validity of trends deduced from satellite data, due to discrepancies between ultraviolet (UV) and infrared (IR) instruments. The UV instruments show a positive trend, while the IR instruments show a negative trend over the last decade. Given uncertainties and our limited understanding of the evolution of tropospheric O3, more O3 measurements are needed, such as those from IR instruments which can measure ozone at all latitudes, day and night. In particular, since 2007, the three IASI (Infrared Atmospheric Sounding Interferometer) instruments have been embarked on board the polar-orbiting meteorological satellites Metop-A, -B and -C. IASI is a nadir-looking Fourier-Transform Spectrometer that measures Earth’s radiance in the thermal infrared range. Ozone concentra_ons are retrieved from IASI radiances using the FORLI (Fast Optimal Retrievals on Layers for IASI) algorithm, which has been implemented at EUMETSAT (European Organization for the Exploitation of Meteorological Satellites). Recently EUMETSAT has been reprocessing the whole IASI O3 dataset providing a homogenous Climate Data Record (CDR) for O3 for the period 2008-present. Furthermore, the CrIS (the Cross-track Infrared Sounder) instruments onboard the Suomi-NPP and JPSS satellite series have been launched in 2011 and 2017, respectively. The TROPESS (TRopospheric Ozone and its Precursors from Earth System Sounding) team at JPL (Jet Propulsion Laboratory) processed ozone data from CrIS radiances for the period 2015-present. Here, we use the long-term record of both IASI and CrIS O3 datasets to analyze the spatio- temporal evolution of daytime and nighfme IASI O3 concentrations. We compare tropospheric O3 trends derived from IASI and CrIS for the common period 2015-present on global, hemispheric and regional scales as well as over some selected cities. We also assess the trends derived from the satellite datasets by comparisons with ozonesonde measurements. The tropospheric budget derived from models and observations is in relatively good agreement according to the first Tropospheric Ozone Assessment Report (TOAR). This report shows an increase in ozone in the troposphere, with regional variations observed. Satellite observations can complement in situ measurements and provide a regional to global view of ozone trends. However, uncertainties persist as to the validity of trends deduced from satellite data, due to discrepancies between ultraviolet (UV) and infrared (IR) instruments. The UV instruments show a positive trend, while the IR instruments show a negative trend over the last decade
Domains
Ocean, Atmosphere
Complete list of metadata
Catherine Cardon  : Connect in order to contact the contributor
https://insu.hal.science/insu-04637306
Submitted on : Friday, July 5, 2024-9:05:40 PM
Last modification on : Sunday, July 7, 2024-3:07:25 AM
No file
Dates and versions
insu-04637306 , version 1 (05-07-2024)
Identifiers
HAL Id : insu-04637306 , version 1
Cite
Anne Boynard, Catherine Wespes, Juliette Hadji-Lazaro, Daniel Hurtmans, Pierre-François Coheur, et al.. Tropospheric ozone distributions and trends from IASI and CrIS. The 36th Quadrennial Ozone Symposium 2024, Jul 2024, Boulder, United States. ⟨insu-04637306⟩
Export
BibTeX XML-TEI Dublin Core DC Terms EndNote DataCite
Collections
INSU CNRS LATMOS UVSQ UNIV-PARIS-SACLAY SORBONNE-UNIVERSITE SU-SCIENCES GS-GEOSCIENCES GS-PHYSIQUE INSTITUT-SCIENCES-LUMIERE
0
View
0
Download
Share
Gmail
Gmail
Mastodon
Mastodon
Facebook
Facebook
X
X
LinkedIn
LinkedIn
Share
More
Contact
Support
Resources
Documentation
FAQ
API
OAI-PMH
AuréHAL
Informations
About
Privacy and personal data
Legal terms
Accessibility
Declaration of compliance
Legal issues
I publish, what are my rights?
The Digital Republic bill
Non-assignment strategy of rights
SHERPA/RoMEO
Portals
Institutional portals
HAL
HAL SHS
HAL Thèses
MédiHAL
CCSD
CCSD
Episciences
Sciencesconf