Product & Services
Subscribe
Submit a paper
Browse
Rankings
Blog↗
Contact
Create account
Sign in
  This is a preprint article, it offers immediate access but has not been peer reviewed.
Download This Paper
Open PDF in Browser
Add Paper to My Library
Share:
Variations of Chloride Depletion and its Impacts on Ozone Formation: A Case Study of a Coastal Area in Shanghai
43 Pages Posted: 18 Jun 2024
Yusen DUAN
affiliation not provided to SSRN
Guangli Xiu
East China University of Science and Technology (ECUST)
Tingting Hu
Shanghai University of Engineering Science
Qingyan Fu
Shanghai Academy of Environmental Sciences
Yan Liu
Shanghai University of Engineering Science
Kun Zhang
Shanghai University
Li Li
Shanghai University
Juntao HUO
Shanghai Environmental Monitoring Center
Zongjiang Gao
affiliation not provided to SSRN
Abstract
Chlorine plays a critical role in atmospheric chemistry. Marine chloride depletion, as a significant source of atmospheric chlorine, impacts coastal acid deposition, atmospheric oxidizing capacity, and global climate. Based on continuous monitoring data of PM2.5 water soluble ions, criteria pollutants, and meteorological data at Chongming Dongtan supersite from 2019 to 2022, variations in chloride depletion and related impact factors were analyzed. Using trajectory analysis via Concentration Weighted Trajectory (CWT) method, the main source regions contributing to chloride depletion were identified. The influence of meteorological conditions on chloride depletion was examined, and the contribution of typical chloride depletion processes to ozone was analyzed using the community atmospheric chemistry box model Chemistry As A Box model Application/Module Efﬁciently Calculating the Chemistry of the Atmosphere(CAABA/MECCA). Results show that chloride depletion increases in summer and decreases in winter. Chloride depletion reaches to peak around noon and gradually decreases after 6 p.m. CWT analysis reveals that airflows predominantly originate from ocean during periods of chloride depletion. As a large coastal port, shipping NOx emissions produce abundant N2O5 through oxidation processes. The liquid-phase reactions of N2O5 with sea-salt aerosol via liquid-phase reactions result in  chloride depletion. Chlorine depletion follows the same trend as O3 and temperature, while showing an inverse trend with NO2, N2O5, NO3·, and pH. Modelling results indicate that oceanic chlorine depletion contributes approximately 8 ppb, 0.1 ppt, and 18 ppt to the enhancement of O3, OH·, and HO2· concentrations. Therefore, attention should be paid to the contribution of ship emissions through chloride depletion mechanisms to O3 pollution in coastal port cities. Chloride depletion serves as a typical indicator of the impact of chloride circulation on coastal ozone.
Keywords: Chloride depletion, ship, CWT, sea salt, CAABA/MECCA box model
Suggested Citation:
DUAN, Yusen and Xiu, Guangli and Hu, Tingting and Fu, Qingyan and Liu, Yan and Zhang, Kun and Li, Li and HUO, Juntao and Gao, Zongjiang, Variations of Chloride Depletion and its Impacts on Ozone Formation: A Case Study of a Coastal Area in Shanghai. Available at SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4869599 or http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.4869599














Download This Paper
Open PDF in Browser
55 References
S M Aschmann , R J I J O C K Atkinson
Rate constants for the gas-phase reactions of alkanes with Cl atoms at 296±2 K , volume 27 , p. 613 - 622 Posted: 1995
R Atkinson , D Baulch , R Cox , J Crowley , R Hampson , R Hynes , M Jenkin , M Rossi , J Troe , I J A Subcommittee
Evaluated kinetic and photochemical data for atmospheric chemistry: Volume II-gas phase reactions of organic species
physics , volume 6 , p. 3625 - 4055 Posted: 2006
A P Ault , T L Guasco , O S Ryder , J Baltrusaitis , L A Cuadra-Rodriguez , D B Collins , M J Ruppel , T H Bertram , K A Prather , V H J J O T A C S Grassian
Inside versus outside: Ion redistribution in nitric acid reacted sea spray aerosol particles as determined by single particle analysis , volume 135 , p. 14528 - 14531 Posted: 2013
S E E Bureau
Shanghai Municipal Ecological Environment Bulletin in 2022 Posted: 2022
Load more
0 Citations
Do you have a job opening that you would like to promote on SSRN?
Place Job Opening
Paper statistics
DOWNLOADS
3
ABSTRACT VIEWS
31
55 References
PlumX Metrics
Related eJournals
Environmental Chemistry eJournal
Follow
Feedback
Submit a Paper
Section 508 Text Only Pages
SSRN Quick Links
SSRN Solutions
Research Paper Series
Conference Papers
Partners in Publishing
Jobs & Announcements
Special Topic Hubs
SSRN Rankings
Top Papers
Top Authors
Top Organizations
About SSRN
Network Directors
Announcements
Contact us
FAQs
Copyright Terms and Conditions Privacy Policy
All content on this site: Copyright © 2023 Elsevier Inc., its licensors, and contributors. All rights are reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. For all open access content, the Creative Commons licensing terms apply.
We use cookies to help provide and enhance our service and tailor content.
To learn more, visit Cookie Settings.
We use cookies that are necessary to make our site work. We may also use additional cookies to analyze, improve, and personalize our content and your digital experience. For more information, see ourCookie Policy
Cookie Settings
Accept all cookies