Product & Services
Subscribe
Submit a paper
Browse
Rankings
Blog↗
Contact
Create account
Sign in
  This is a preprint article, it offers immediate access but has not been peer reviewed.
Download This Paper
Open PDF in Browser
Add Paper to My Library
Share:
More than Particulates Matter: Multiple Pollutants and Productivity in Indian Call Centers
45 Pages Posted: 10 Jul 2024
Sarojini Hirshleifer
University of California, Riverside
Deepshikha Batheja
One Health Trust
Jamie T. Mullins
University of Massachusetts Amherst
Abstract
We measure the impact of three components of air pollution on daily labor productivity in call centers in five Indian cities.  We find that a one standard deviation increase in fine particulate matter (PM2.5), a pollutant that has been the primary focus of the literature on the harms of air pollution, has a large negative effect of 0.15σ on productivity.  Notably, we find a comparable negative effect for a one standard deviation increase in carbon monoxide of 0.14σ as well as a negative effect of 0.09σ from ozone. In summing air pollution harms across our sample, carbon monoxide is responsible for more than half of the total productivity lost, which is more than double the losses attributable to PM2.5. Our results underscore the importance of considering components of air pollution beyond particulate matter.  To that end, we illustrate the potential productivity impacts of a national policy in India that targets PM2.5 compared to a counterfactual policy that also targets carbon monoxide and ozone.
Keywords: environment, pollution, productivity, labor, personnel economics, India, development, health
Suggested Citation:
Hirshleifer, Sarojini and Batheja, Deepshikha and Mullins, Jamie, More than Particulates Matter: Multiple Pollutants and Productivity in Indian Call Centers. Available at SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4891088 or http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.4891088



Download This Paper
Open PDF in Browser
61 References
Achyuta Adhvaryu , Namrata Kala , Anant Nyshadham
Management and shocks to worker productivity
Journal of Political Economy , volume 130 , issue 1 , p. 1 - 47 Posted: 2022
Sandra Aguilar-Gomez , Holt Dwyer , Joshua Graff Zivin , Matthew Neidell
This is air: The "nonhealth" effects of air pollution
Annual Review of Resource Economics , volume 14 , p. 403 - 425 Posted: 2022
James Archsmith , Anthony Heyes , Soodeh Saberian
Air quality and error quantity: Pollution and performance in a high-skilled, quality-focused occupation
Journal of the Association of Environmental and Resource Economists , volume 5 , issue 4 , p. 827 - 863 Posted: 2018
Deepshikha Batheja
Gender peer effects in the workplace: A field experiment in Indian call centers Posted: 2019
Load more
0 Citations
Do you have a job opening that you would like to promote on SSRN?
Place Job Opening
Paper statistics
DOWNLOADS
1
ABSTRACT VIEWS
16
61 References
PlumX Metrics
Related eJournals
European Economics: Labor & Social Conditions eJournal
Follow
Econometric Modeling: Agriculture, Natural Resources & Environmental Economics eJournal
Follow
Feedback
Submit a Paper
Section 508 Text Only Pages
SSRN Quick Links
SSRN Solutions
Research Paper Series
Conference Papers
Partners in Publishing
Jobs & Announcements
Special Topic Hubs
SSRN Rankings
Top Papers
Top Authors
Top Organizations
About SSRN
Network Directors
Announcements
Contact us
FAQs
Copyright Terms and Conditions Privacy Policy
All content on this site: Copyright © 2023 Elsevier Inc., its licensors, and contributors. All rights are reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. For all open access content, the Creative Commons licensing terms apply.
We use cookies to help provide and enhance our service and tailor content.
To learn more, visit Cookie Settings.
We use cookies that are necessary to make our site work. We may also use additional cookies to analyze, improve, and personalize our content and your digital experience. For more information, see ourCookie Policy
Cookie Settings
Accept all cookies