We are aware of an issue impacting some readers trying to access content via their library’s proxy service. We are working to resolve this as soon as possible and apologize for any inconvenience.
Search within
Login / Register
JOURNALS


TOPICS
BOOKS
OTHER PUBLICATIONS
POLICIES
Membership
AGU.org
Earth's Future
Research Article
Open Access
Projecting Changes in the Frequency and Magnitude of Ozone Pollution Events Under Uncertain Climate Sensitivity
James D. East, 
Erwan Monier, 
Rebecca K. Saari, 
Fernando Garcia-Menendez
First published: 02 June 2024 https://doi.org/10.1029/2023EF003941
SECTIONS
PDF
TOOLS
SHARE
Abstract
Climate change is projected to worsen ozone pollution over many populated regions, with larger impacts at higher concentrations. More intense and frequent ozone episodes risk setbacks to human health and environmental policy achievements. However, assessing these changes is complicated by uncertain climate sensitivity, closely related to climate model response, and internal variability in simulations projecting climate's influence on air quality. Here, leveraging a global modeling framework that one-way couples a human activity model, an Earth system model of intermediate complexity, and an atmospheric chemistry model, we investigate the role of climate sensitivity in climate-induced changes to high ozone pollution episodes in the United States using multiple greenhouse gas emissions scenarios, representations of climate sensitivity, and initial condition members. We bias correct and evaluate historical model simulations, identifying modeled and observed O3 episodes using extreme value theory, and extend the approach to projections of mid- and end-century climate impacts. Results show that the influence of climate sensitivity can be as significant as that of greenhouse gas emissions scenario absent precursor emissions changes. Climate change is projected to increase the magnitude of the highest annually occurring O3 concentrations by over 2.3 ppb on average across the U.S. at mid-century under a high climate sensitivity and moderate emissions scenario, but the increase is limited to less than 0.3 ppb under lower climate sensitivity. Further, we show that areas in the U.S. currently meeting air quality standards risk being pushed into non-compliance due to a climate-induced increase in frequency of high ozone days.
Key Points
We project climate impacts on US ozone episodes with spatially varying bias correction and a climate and air quality simulation ensemble
Climate sensitivity can be as influential as GHG scenario without air pollutant emissions changes in mid-century ozone episodes
Climate-induced increases in ozone pollution may increase risk of not meeting air quality standards in several areas of the U.S.
Plain Language Summary
Climate change can worsen O3 air pollution across much of the U.S., threatening environmental policy goals and posing health risks. Projections of this impact rely on models that have uncertainties associated with simulating future climate. We investigated the influence of uncertainty from climate sensitivity, or the simulated change in Earth's average surface temperature in response to an increase in atmospheric CO2, on projections of air quality using a collection of simulations. To improve O3 estimates based on model simulations, we applied a new bias correction method to the model concentrations that accounts for spatial differences in atmospheric pollution. Then, we applied extreme value statistics to describe the behavior of the highest O3 concentrations. We found that, under climate change, the most polluted days worsen and occur more frequently, making it more difficult to meet air quality standards in highly populated regions and suggesting that continued efforts to mitigate pollutant emissions are necessary to counteract climate change's effects on O3. Further, our results indicate that the model's climate sensitivity is as influential as greenhouse gas emissions scenario for mid-century projections, showing that the strength of the earth system's response to greenhouse gas levels is a critical consideration when simulating climate impacts.
1 Introduction
Climate change is projected to affect future ozone (O3) pollution through multiple mechanisms, including changes to meteorology and chemistry, feedbacks from natural emissions sources, and changes to physical processes such as pollutant deposition (Fiore et al., 2015; Jacob & Winner, 2009; Zanis et al., 2022), with negative impacts on human health, the environment, and the economy (Fann et al., 2015, 2022; Garcia-Menendez et al., 2015; Nolte, Dolwick, et al., 2018). These impacts are expected to increase the magnitude and frequency of high ozone events (Brown-Steiner et al., 2015; Gao et al., 2020; Rieder et al., 2015; Schnell et al., 2016), as well as their co-occurrence with heat waves and particulate matter pollution episodes (Fiore et al., 2022; Meehl et al., 2018; Shen et al., 2016). By increasing the magnitude or frequency of the highest air pollutant concentrations, climate change could erase half of all gains from the Clean Air Act in the United States (Saari et al., 2019). Increases in extremes are particularly relevant for O3, for which small changes could imperil attainment to air quality standards, such as the U.S. National Ambient Air Quality Standards (NAAQS). However, climate policy will be a strong determinant of future O3 pollution (Garcia-Menendez et al., 2015). An improved understanding of these effects from climate change is critical to preparing sufficient air quality management efforts to meet ambient standards, and to effectively mitigate the impacts of O3 on human health and the environment.
Projections of climate impacts to O3 are complicated by uncertainties in climate projections that stem from three primary sources: internal variability, greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions scenario, and climate model response (Callahan & Mankin, 2020; Deser et al., 2020; Hawkins & Sutton, 2009; Lehner et al., 2020; Mankin et al., 2020; Monier et al., 2015; U.S. EPA, 2015a). Each of these uncertainties propagates to impacts on O3 (East et al., 2022), leading to varying estimates of the distribution, magnitude, and regional sign of the “climate penalty” on surface O3 (Fiore et al., 2012, 2015; Garcia-Menendez et al., 2017; Nolte et al., 2021; Rieder et al., 2018; Turnock et al., 2020; Wu et al., 2008; Zanis et al., 2022). Climate sensitivity, closely related to climate model response, refers to the earth system's response to external forcing and in climate models is quantified as the change in average surface temperature for a doubling of atmospheric CO2 (Sherwood et al., 2020). The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) reports the very likely range for Earth's climate sensitivity to be 2.0–5.0°C (IPCC, 2021), but some recent generation climate models report sensitivities at the upper end and higher than the very likely range (Tokarska et al., 2020; Zelinka et al., 2020). As a result, projections of climate impacts, including those on air quality, will differ depending on the underlying climate model's sensitivity, even when controlling for internal variability and using the same GHG emissions scenario (Hausfather et al., 2022; U.S. EPA, 2015a). The influence of climate sensitivity on modeled estimates of climate change impacts been clearly established in impacts studies focusing on different sectors, such as agriculture (Blanc et al., 2017), water resources (Strzepek et al., 2015), infrastructure (Neumann et al., 2015), and forest productivity and wildfires (Kim et al., 2017).
The influence of different climate sensitivities on projections of surface O3 extremes has not been examined. Previous research showed that higher climate sensitivity may further exacerbate future air pollution (East et al., 2022), but few studies project ozone pollution extreme events while accounting for this uncertainty. While some studies simulating climate-driven changes in occurrences of high O3 have used multiple initializations to address internal variability (Fiore et al., 2022; Rieder et al., 2015, 2018), most rely on a single GHG emissions pathway (Meehl et al., 2018; Rieder et al., 2015), and a single climate sensitivity. Consequently, the projections depend implicitly on a particular realization of a climate model's sensitivity for a given GHG scenario, but the robustness of these projected impacts on O3 episodes to different realizations of climate sensitivity in the very likely range remains unexplored.
A further challenge to projecting O3 extremes is that climate-chemistry models exhibit a consistent high bias when compared to historical observations (Brown-Steiner et al., 2015; Lamarque et al., 2012; Liu et al., 2022; Turnock et al., 2020). While projecting concentration changes between historical and future climates often account for the bias by considering relative changes, concentration thresholds are important to assess air pollution extremes (Phalitnonkiat et al., 2016; Rieder et al., 2013). Correction methods have been used to address model bias, but may only correct the bias in mean O3 concentrations (Brown-Steiner et al., 2015). Rieder et al. (2015) addresses this by accounting for climate-induced changes to the O3 distributions. However, the correction is applied using observations in a limited region, an approach that may not be valid if observations from large and heterogenous regions are considered. To examine the impacts of climate change on extreme air pollution, approaches are needed to bias correct model fields covering large geographic areas and locations with diverse statistical characteristics.
Here, we bias-correct modeled ground-level O3, introducing an approach to apply the bias correction over an area with heterogeneous concentrations, and analyze the impact of climate change on the frequency and magnitude of high O3 episodes in the U.S. We use a model framework that one-way couples a human activity model, a single Earth system model of intermediate complexity, and a global atmospheric chemistry model. We generate an ensemble of simulations designed to capture uncertainty due to climate sensitivity, GHG emissions pathway, and internal variability in climate projections by simulating climate impacts on air quality in 30-year time slices at the beginning (1981–2010), middle (2036–2065), and end (2086–2115) of the 21st century, with five initial condition members, three climate sensitivity scenarios, and three GHG emissions scenarios. In total, the ensemble includes over 2,800 annual climate and air quality simulations, which we leverage to assess the influence of climate uncertainties within the projections. Our results project a deleterious climate change impact on high O3 concentrations, with increases to their magnitude and frequency across much of the U.S. In the absence of precursor emissions changes, these climate-induced effects may bring areas into non-compliance with existing National Air Quality Standards by mid-century. The analysis further reveals climate sensitivity as an important driver in projected climate change impacts during the 21st century.
2 Methods
2.1 Modeling Framework and Simulation Ensemble
To project the impacts of climate change on high summer (May–September; MJJAS) O3 concentrations over the U.S., we rely on an ensemble of simulations generated with a climate and air quality modeling framework. In this framework, the Massachusetts Institute of Technology Integrated Global System Model (MIT IGSM) is coupled to the National Center for Atmospheric Research Community Atmosphere Model (CAM) to simulate historical and future climate scenarios (Monier et al., 2013). The MIT IGSM couples a global human activity model, the Economic Projection and Policy Analysis (EPPA) model (Chen et al., 2016; Paltsev et al., 2005), with an earth system model of intermediate complexity, the MIT Earth System Model (MESM) (Sokolov et al., 2018). EPPA is a computable general equilibrium economic model that simulates economic activity and GHG emissions according to policy constraints (Paltsev et al., 2005). GHG emissions and land use change from EPPA are used as inputs to the MESM Earth system model. In the MIT-IGSM CAM framework, MESM simulates 3-dimensional climate fields using coupled ocean, land, and atmosphere components. Monthly sea surface temperatures and sea-ice cover, simulated with a 3-dimensional dynamical ocean model, are provided to CAM, along with GHG concentrations and land use changes (Monier et al., 2018).
A feature of the MIT IGSM-CAM is the ability to adjust its climate sensitivity by modulating the cloud radiative feedback strength, a primary cause of different climate sensitivity in different climate models (Zelinka et al., 2020). The cloud radiative feedback strength adjustment required to achieve a given climate sensitivity is determined from the global mean temperature change in a perturbed simulation versus a pre-industrial control simulation, as described in Sokolov and Monier (2012). Versions of the model with different climate sensitivity have different climate responses to changes in greenhouse gas and aerosol concentrations that manifest primarily in surface temperature, and indirectly as changes in precipitation and general circulation patterns (Monier et al., 2013, 2015). The MIT-IGSM CAM has been shown to realistically simulate historical climate system observations (Monier et al., 2013; Sokolov et al., 2018; Waldhoff et al., 2015) and U.S. temperatures in line with those reported by the National Climate Assessment (NCA) (Vose et al., 2017). The framework is described in detail in Monier et al. (2013, 2018).
To