Green Warrior:
Swamp Things and the Environmentally Turbulent 1980s
 
Americana: The Journal of American Popular Culture (1900-present), Spring  2024, Volume 23, Issue 1
https://americanpopularculture.com/journal/articles/spring_2024/howe.htm
  Andrew Howe
La Sierra University
INTRODUCTION
Swamp Thing, a character from the DC Comics universe, provides a fascinating window into the turbulent environmental politics of the 1980s. Len Wein introduced the half-human/half-botanical creature in 1971. During the time Alan Moore helmed the comic starting a decade later, the character achieved its greatest popularity. Under Moore, the comic reflected the growing Culture Wars of the era. Although not fully articulated until James Davison Hunter's Culture Wars: The Struggle to Define America (1991), the seeds for the current flavor of conservative/progressive divide were sown during the 1960s and 1970s, reaching prominence during the twelve-year period marking the presidencies of Ronald Reagan (1981-1989) and George H.W. Bush (1989-1993). One battleground upon which this struggle consistently played out: the environment. In large part, the ascendency of ecological concerns in the American political landscape involved new insights regarding human impact upon the environment. Rachel Carson's Silent Spring (1962) paved the way for Farley Mowat's Never Cry Wolf (1963) and a host of other texts calling attention to ecological issues. The 1970s was a decade of increased environmental awareness. Through satellite imagery, the Landsat Program demonstrated the appalling rate of deforestation in the Amazon basin. Earth Day debuted, and Richard Nixon signed the Endangered Species Act into law. Woodsy the Owl ("Give a Hoot, Don't Pollute") and the Crying Indian ("Keep America Beautiful") were born as was Swamp Thing, an elemental, botanical creature of comic books and later film, television, and video game adaptations. 
During a time of heightened environmental awareness, Swamp Thing fought for the preservation of nature against human encroachment. Although the character originated in the early 1970s – and continues to appear in one form or another to this day – its greatest cultural resonance came during the period 1982-1993, largely coinciding with the maturation of the Culture Wars. During this time, Alan Moore took over the comic, two film adaptations were released, and two television series aired. These texts appeared during an era of upheaval for environmental concerns. Many viewed James G. Watt – President Reagan's Secretary of the Interior from 1981-1983 – as openly hostile to environmental protections, and a series of events occurred during the decade that generally yielded an apocalyptic vision about the destructiveness of man: the end of the Sagebrush Rebellion; the sinking of the Greenpeace ship Rainbow Warrior; the Chernobyl nuclear disaster; the Bhopal Union Carbide disaster; fear over acid rain; the discovery of a hole in the Antarctic ozone layer; and the invasion of Africanized "Killer" Bees, to name a few. This article examines manifestations of Swamp Thing during this period (1982-1993), situating the environmental degradation and protectionism they explore, contextually, within a time of eco-political turbulence. Analysis involves multiple forms of media, seeking a broad-based understanding of not only Moore's comic but also the cinematic and television adaptations within 1980s environmental developments. As such, the analysis is as much historical as it is textual. Although numerous ecological issues are addressed, the botanical is privileged due to Swamp Thing's plant-based nature. 
  CONTEXT AND CRITICISM 
First appearing in the DC collection House of Secrets, the initial iteration of the vegetal hero ran for twenty-four issues between 1972 and 1976. Although at this point more a tale of gothic horror than ecological protectionism, the contextual impact of environmental concerns cannot be denied. Coming less than a decade after Silent Spring and Carson's focus upon the ravages of DDT on the environment, it is no surprise that the origins of Swamp Thing involved chemicals. Furthermore, such pollution continued in the news during the late 1960s and early 1970s. As early as 1966, debate over the use of the chemical defoliant Agent Orange by the US Army during the Vietnam War had reached the United Nations. In 1969, the Cuyahoga River Fire in Cleveland illustrated that chemical saturation of an environment involved more than just distant battlefields. Interest in Swamp Thing may have faded during the mid-1970s, but during this time the seeds for resurgence were laid with the Landsat Program, a joint effort by NASA and the US Geological Survey to photograph the earth from space. The first Landsat satellite launched in 1972 – although it was not until 1975 that images were taken of the Amazon basin and the amount of deforestation became evident. Subsequent images taken during the rest of the decade and into the 1980s demonstrated that such habitat loss was proceeding more rapidly than anyone had previously suspected.
Despite a diversification of ecological focus during this decade, flora took center stage with deforestation and the impact of acid rain upon trees becoming cause célèbre issues of the era. Even the fear of the "Killer" Bee invasion revolved around botanical concerns, the threat to personal safety a hyped-up sideshow to the real anxiety that such bees would disrupt normative pollination. Fictional characters such as the Lorax – a Dr. Seuss creation who "spoke for the trees" – and the Swamp Thing were even more resonant than when they had first been written into existence. Wes Craven optioned the cinematic rights to the DC character, releasing the film Swamp Thing in February 1982. Due to its success, Martin Pasko resuscitated the comic in a second series – The Saga of the Swamp Thing – with the first issue released in May. A few years later, Alan Moore took over the reins from Pasko, which lead to the most popular and critically acclaimed run for the character (1984-1987) although the series would continue after Moore's departure under different authors until 1996. 
Numerous critics have explored the political dimensions of Swamp Thing, particularly in the context of Alan Moore's contributions to the character. Maggie Gray has sought to understand Moore from a political and aesthetic context. Still others – including Jack Bushnell, Annalisa Di Liddo, and Brian Johnson – have moved the discussion into the more purely environmental. The latter notes the transformation under Moore from a Gothic horror tale to one more invested in environmental concerns. In his essay "Libidinal Ecologies," Johnson explains, "In a range of stories focusing on toxic dumping, biological weapons development, environmental apocalypse, and the rise of green activism, Moore transformed Swamp Thing from a Gothic monster serial into an ecologically-conscious horror comic whose more conventional chills now became closely intertwined with non-recycling suburbanites" (Johnson 16). Johnson links Swamp Thing to "deep ecology" – a concept promoted by Arne Naess in the early 1970s – taking a more ethical and political than strictly historical approach to the character. Hans Staats also focuses upon the combination of gothic aesthetics with environmental concerns – which he terms the "ecogothic" – likewise noting the importance of Naess in this combination (Staats 82, 85). Staats does, in fact, explore historical trends resonant with Swamp Thing, but ones that are more large-scale in nature, for example, climate change and nuclear weapons (83). He references no specific historical episodes. 
Several critics do come a bit closer to linking Swamp Thing to specific historical and political moments. Maaheen Ahmed dedicates a chapter to the comic in his study Monstrous Imaginaries. Specifically, Ahmed notes Swamp Thing as a proxy character facilitating awareness of environmental degradation: “Notably, the violent acts against the Swamp Thing are often also acts of violence against the environment. This exemplifies the destructive potential of humans, which is embodied by mutant creatures such [as] Woodrue and Nuke-face, who are outcomes of a combination of technological hazards and social issues” (58). Much as with Johnson, Staats, and others, Ahmed does not engage specifically with the environmental scene of the 1980s. Hindi Krinsky operates in the same general vein – exploring the more overtly political turn taken by Swamp Thing during the Moore years but generally avoiding a discussion of the historical episodes providing context for this character's resurgence. Other political frames have also been explored such as eco-feminism, a revival of Romanticism, and more recently the Anthropocene, but most have been strictly theoretical and thus hesitant to explore specific historical moments. This article addresses the lack of specific historicization during the decade in which Swamp Thing proliferated into different forms of media.
  ALAN MOORE TAKES THE REINS
Len Wein's Swamp Thing reflected as much Gothic traditions of horror as it did environmental concerns. The second series, however, highlighted the latter. Although all six writers responsible for the comic during the second series focused upon ecological issues – notably, horror author Nancy A. Collins – Moore's forays into environmental issues remain the most celebrated. Although still early in his career, Moore had acquired a reputation for merging perceptive political commentary with his aesthetic vision, most conspicuously in V for Vendetta. Jesse Schedeen notes that Moore inherited a "vegan-friendly Hulk," but the writer reinvented the creature in an "epic tale of angst and existential milieu." Indeed, from the moment he took over the series, Moore imbued Swamp Thing with an authoritative gravitas albeit an inability to solve all societal ills. Some problems have no easy fix. Moore's progressive environmental agenda was tempered by a reality that solutions require significant levels of commitment. An urgency is hardwired into the world-building in the form of the Parliament of Trees, the governing body of all global flora employing Swamp Thing as their mouthpiece. Moore situated this entity in the Amazon Basin during a time of increased concern about deforestation and, in the issue "Parliament of Trees," depicted the Amazon in the process of being hit by an asteroid-like object (Book Four 113), perhaps presaging another extinction event. The nobility and wisdom of the Parliament of Trees stood in marked contrast to an era in which the wounds of Watergate were still fresh and political entities not exactly celebrated.
References to deforestation continued throughout Moore's oeuvre although not all his musings on ecological loss involved flora. In "Revelations," Neanderthals, Dodos, and dinosaurs dot the landscape, each one evidence of an extinction (Moore, Book Four 86-87). A woman wears a coat of fox stoles, a reminder that animals are slaughtered for frivolous reasons (Moore, Book Four 95). The botanical, however, remains the primary consideration. In "Roots," Moore focuses upon the chainsaw. He notes the object's importance in horror films as it acts out on humans what they do to trees, perhaps an acknowledgment of Len Wein's original, more Gothic vision (Moore, Book One 121). Even Batman wields a chainsaw, and defoliants too, in "Garden of Earthly Delights" (Moore, Book Five 57). In his defense, the caped crusader attempts to remove a forest choking Gotham, one that Swamp Thing created as a defensive measure after being pursued around the city. Still, the message is clear: if even Batman has no apprehension in cutting down trees, what hope is there? A quote in "Swamped" about the paucity of redwoods appears to be a reference to Ronald Reagan who once stated: "I mean, if you've looked at a hundred thousand acres or so of trees – you know, a tree is a tree, how many more do you need to look at?" (Reagan qtd. in Mikkelson). Moore took another jab at the then US President in "Garden of Earthly Delights" in which the mayor of Gotham paraphrases Reagan in denoting trees as a source of pollution (Moore, Book One 82; Book Five 59). As the comic arts blogger Darren Mooney notes, in its denouncement of racism and misogyny Moore's work exists as a site of resistance spanning the middle period of Reagan's presidency. “There’s the casual sexism which still exists, even in the post-feminist era," Mooney explains. He continues, "There's the racism that we like to tell ourselves is long gone but is really still there bleeding in at the corners of society. Social relevance is perhaps the key to classic, iconic horror...and Moore has crafted a suitable horror for Reagan's America" (Mooney, "Alan Moore's Run"). In titling this issue "The Garden of Earthly Delights," Moore invokes the dark