ACS ACS Publications C&EN CAS
Find my institution Log In
My Activity
Publications
RETURN TO ARTICLES ASAPPREVBIOREMEDIATION AND B...NEXT
Regulatory Mechanisms of Quorum Sensing System of Bacteria in Response to Chlorine and Ozone Disinfection
Yang Liu
, Huihui Zhou
, Jing Wang
, Sitong Liu
, Guo-Jun Xie
, Bing-Feng Liu
, and Defeng Xing*
Cite this: Environ. Sci. Technol. 2024, XXXX, XXX, XXX-XXX
Publication Date:June 27, 2024
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.est.3c08305
© 2024 American Chemical Society
Request reuse permissions
Article Views
843
Altmetric
-
Citations
-
LEARN ABOUT THESE METRICS
Share
Add to
Export
RIS
Access Through Your Institution
Other access options
Supporting Info (1)»
Supporting Information
SUBJECTS:Antimicrobial activity,Bacteria,Biofilms,Chlorine,Genetics
Environmental Science & Technology
Abstract
Waterborne pathogens invariably present considerable threats to public health. The quorum sensing (QS) system is instrumental in coordinating bacterial growth and metabolisms. However, the responses and regulatory mechanisms of bacteria to various disinfection technologies through quorum sensing are still unclear. This study examines the inactivation effect of chlorination and ozonation on biofilms and planktonic cells of QS signaling-deficient mutants of Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Cell counting and viability assessment revealed that the combined disinfection of chlorine and ozone was the most effective for inactivating planktonic P. aeruginosa within 10 min of exposure. Additionally, microfluidic chip culture demonstrated that the secretion of quinolone signals escalated biofilms’ disinfection resistance. Disinfection exposure significantly altered the gene expression of wild-type strains and QS signaling-deficient mutants. Moreover, the QS system triggered multilayered gene expression programs as a responsive protection to disinfectant exposure, including oxidative stress, ribosome synthesis, and the nutrient absorption of bacteria. These insights broaden our understanding of bacterial QS in response to disinfection, promising potential strategies toward efficient disinfection processes.
KEYWORDS:disinfection Pseudomonas aeruginosa biofilm quorum sensing transcriptome
Read this Article
To access this article, please review the available access options below.
Purchase Access
Read this article for 48 hours. Check out below using your ACS ID or as a guest.
Purchase Access
Restore my guest access
Recommended
Access through Your Institution
You may have access to this article through your institution.
Access Through Your Institution
Log in to Access
You may have access to this article with your ACS ID if you have previously purchased it or have ACS member benefits. Log in below.
Login with ACS ID
Supporting Information
The Supporting Information is available free of charge at https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acs.est.3c08305.
Schematic of disinfection apparatus (Figure S1); cell proportion of P. aeruginosa-Gfp before and after disinfection by flow cytometry (Figure S2); reactivation of P. aeruginosa in the dark under different disinfection treatments (Figure S3); response of P. aeruginosa biofilms after different disinfection treatments (Figure S4); transcriptome analysis of P. aeruginosa under chlorine combined with ozone disinfection (Figure S5); volcano plot and DEG cluster of GO enrichment (Figure S6); KEGG pathway (top 10) enrichment analysis of DEGs (Table S1); and DEGs involved in the special pathways of P. aeruginosa under chlorine combined with ozone disinfection (Table S2) (PDF)
Regulatory Mechanisms of Quorum Sensing System of Bacteria in Response to Chlorine and Ozone Disinfection
11
views
0
shares
0
downloads
Share
Download
figshare
Terms & Conditions
Most electronic Supporting Information files are available without a subscription to ACS Web Editions. Such files may be downloaded by article for research use (if there is a public use license linked to the relevant article, that license may permit other uses). Permission may be obtained from ACS for other uses through requests via the RightsLink permission system: http://pubs.acs.org/page/copyright/permissions.html.
Cited By
This article has not yet been cited by other publications.
Download PDF
Partners
1155 Sixteenth Street N.W.
Washington, DC 20036
Copyright © 2024
American Chemical Society
About
About ACS Publications
ACS & Open Access
ACS Membership
ACS Publications Blog
Resources and Information
Journals A-Z
Books and Reference
Advertising Media Kit
Institutional Sales
ACS Researcher Resources
Privacy Policy
Terms of Use
Support & Contact
Help
Live Chat
FAQ
Connect with ACS Publications