Kansas State University
Sign in
Browse A-Z
Libraries
Communities and collections
Browse K-REx
Statistics
About
Policies
Log In
Home
Electronic Theses, Dissertations, and Reports
K-State Electronic Theses, Dissertations, and Reports: 2004 -
Effect of sorghum flour treated with ozone and heat on the quality of gluten-free bread and cake
Effect of sorghum flour treated with ozone and heat on the quality of gluten-free bread and cake
Files
KathrynMarston2009.pdf (1.2 MB)
Date
2009-12-10T15:44:34Z
Authors
Marston, Kathryn G.
Publisher
Kansas State University
Abstract
In order to improve the quality of products available for consumers who require a gluten-free diet, this study examined the effects of heat and ozone treatments on sorghum flour functionality in gluten-free bread and cake. In the ozone treatment experiment, commercially milled food-grade sorghum flour was subjected to ozone at the rate of 0.06 L/min for 15, 30, and 45 minutes. In the heat treatment experiment, commercially milled food-grade sorghum flour was subjected to dry-heat at two temperatures (95ºC and 125º) for 15, 30, and 45 minutes. Characterization of flour from each treatment included measurements of flour pH, color, and pasting properties. Evaluation of bread quality from each treatment included measurements of specific volume, color, crumb properties, and crumb firmness. Evaluation of cake quality from each treatment included measurements of specific gravity, volume, symmetry, uniformity, color, crumb structure, and crumb firmness. Bake testing using ozonated sorghum flour in a high-ratio white layer cake formulation showed that volume significantly increased (p<0.05) as ozonation time increased. Additionally, longer ozonation exposure times increased cells per slice area, lightness, and slice brightness values in gluten-free cakes while reducing crumb firmness. Despite improving lightness and slice brightness values, ozonation did not significantly increase (p>0.05) the specific volume of gluten-free batter based bread. In the heat treatment experiment, the optimum time and temperature relationship for improving sorghum flour was 125ºC for 30 minutes. This treatment level produced bread with the highest specific volume (3.08 mL/g) and the most cells per slice area (50.38 cells/cm2). This treatment level also produced cakes with the highest volume (72.17 cc) and most cells per slice area (79.18 cells/cm2). Additionally, cake and bread made from this heat treatment was deemed more acceptable in comparison to the control during consumer testing. The control sorghum flour in both studies produced breads and cakes with low volume, poor crumb properties, and dense textures. These results can assist in the product development process in advancing the quality of sorghum-based gluten-free foods for the consumers who require a gluten-free diet.
Keywords
Sorghum, Ozonation, Heat treatment, Gluten-free bread, Gluten-free cake
Graduation Month
December
Degree
Master of Science
Department
Food Science Institute, Animal Science & Industry
Major Professor
Fadi M. Aramouni
Date
2009
Type
Thesis
URI
http://hdl.handle.net/2097/2266
Collections
K-State Electronic Theses, Dissertations, and Reports: 2004 -
Full item page
Center for the Advancement of Digital Scholarship
K-State Libraries
1117 Mid-Campus Drive North, Manhattan, KS 66506
785-532-3514|cads@k-state.edu
Give feedback
Contact UsEmergencyStatements and DisclosuresAccessibility
© Kansas State University
We collect and process your personal information for the following purposes: Authentication, Preferences, Acknowledgement and Statistics.
Customize
DeclineThat's ok