Loading [MathJax]/jax/output/HTML-CSS/config.js
Your privacy, your choice
We use essential cookies to make sure the site can function. We, and our 209 partners, also use optional cookies and similar technologies for advertising, personalisation of content, usage analysis, and social media.
By accepting optional cookies, you consent to allowing us and our partners to store and access personal data on your device, such as browsing behaviour and unique identifiers. Some third parties are outside of the European Economic Area, with varying standards of data protection. See our privacy policy for more information on the use of your personal data. Your consent choices apply to springer.com and applicable subdomains.
You can find further information, and change your preferences via 'Manage preferences'.
You can also change your preferences or withdraw consent at any time via 'Your privacy choices', found in the footer of every page.
We use cookies and similar technologies for the following purposes:
Store and/or access information on a device
Personalised advertising and content, advertising and content measurement, audience research and services development
Accept all cookies
Reject optional cookies
Manage preferences
Skip to main content
Log in
Find a journal
Publish with us
Track your research
Search
Cart
Home Fibers and Polymers Article
Eco-Friendly Ozone Process for Denim Garments as an Alternative to Conventional Bleaching
Regular Article
Open access
Published: 01 June 2024
Volume 25, pages 2661–2667, (2024)
Cite this article
Download PDF
You have full access to this
open access
article
Fibers and Polymers
Aims and scope
Submit manuscript
Rıza Atav
, Öner Gündüz, Sercan Yaz, Gizem Çakan & Bahadırhan Sevgili 
234 Accesses
Explore all metrics
Abstract
In recent years, sustainability has become an important issue in production. The denim industry is environmentally problematic as an area where a wide variety of chemicals are used. Therefore, it is of great importance to replace various chemicals with clean technologies such as ozone. In this study, it was aimed to determine the effects of water content, treatment time and pH on both color fading and strength of the fabric during ozone treatment of denim textiles. Thus, optimum conditions of color fading with ozone in industrial applications have been revealed. It was found that it is most appropriate to work at 30% water content and the ozonation time should be changed according to the desired degree of color fading. Furthermore, it can be said that there is no significant difference between pH 4 and pH 7, but pH 11 is significantly different from them and the best color fading is obtained at pH 4. Since there is no significant difference between pH 4 and pH 7, it is thought that the pH 7 condition, which is simpler in practice and does not require the use of chemicals, would be optimal.
Similar content being viewed by others
Nano Photo Bleaching Method of Cotton Fabrics for a Sustainable Finishing
Article Open access
20 July 2024
Investigation and Optimization of a New Bleaching Process for Sulfur-Dyed Denim Fabric
Chapter © 2024
Ozone bleaching of cotton fabrics with the aid of ultrasonic humidifier
Article 23 June 2016
1 Introduction
The fashion industry is growing faster than ever and the main target of manufacturers and designers is to offer the most up-to-date designs to appease consumer demand by presenting low-cost products. Among textile products, no fabric is as widely accepted as denim [1]. The denim jeans market is expected to reach approximately US$87.4 billion by 2027, up from US$63.5 billion in 2020 [2]. In denim fabrics, only warp threads are dyed using indigo dye. Weft threads are left in their natural color, white. Dyeing methods for denim warp yarn are rope dyeing, beam dyeing and slasher dyeing [3]. Denim garments remain the world’s most polluting textiles, not only because of the indigo dyeing but also because of the amount of chemicals and water it requires to achieve the best washes [4]. Denim washing is an important operation in the ready-made clothing industry to add value to final products. There are many operations available to perform this treatment [5]. Processes such as scouring, bleaching, dyeing, sandblasting and potassium permanganate spray are major causes of environmental concerns. Ozone washing is considered a sustainable chemical process and has many benefits compared to conventional denim washing [6]. Because ozone fades the color of clothes and provides a significant gain from water and chemicals [4]. The application of ozone has several benefits compared to the traditional denim washing. These benefits can be listed as follows;
1.
Environmental benefits The ozonation process, especially dry ozonation, is free from the problems of effluent generation and recycling, which reduces environmental pollution. The ozonation process operates at a lower temperature, which saves energy and reduces Green House Gas emissions.
2.
Economic benefits The ozonation process saves chemicals, water, and energy, which helps the denim manufacturers to save production cost.
3.
Social benefits As the ozonation process reduces the environmental pollution, the society is free from the issues relating to environmental pollution.
4.
Other benefits Ozonation process is faster due to rapid color removal by ozone, which saves energy and operational costs [6].
Ozone can be produced artificially by various means, such as corona discharge. Oxygen molecules (O2), which are compressed and collected in a tank that will feed the ozone generator, are broken down by high voltage. “O” atoms form a bond with O2 molecules, causing the formation of a triatomic oxygen molecule (O3) [7]. Molecular ozone is a selective oxidant with a reducing potential of 2.07 V at 25 °C [8]. Therefore, it can attack the glycosidic bond of cotton fiber and cleave the olefinic groups of indigo dye [7]. Ozone gas causes the dyed textile materials to fade by breaking down the chromophores in the dyes as shown in Fig. 1. In fact, ozone decomposition of indigo leads to the formation of isatin. The isatin molecule has a yellowish color. For this reason, during the reaction, the material changes from blue (indigo) to yellow (isatin) [4]. Therefore, post-treatment rinsing is critical to remove any traces of isatin. Ozone is an unstable gas and can react directly or indirectly with the target substance when transferred to water. In the indirect pathway, a promoter catalyzes the breakdown of ozone into radicals. If such promoters are not present, ozone directly oxidizes the target molecules. Under acidic conditions (pH < 4) the direct reaction pathway predominates, while under alkaline conditions (pH > 10) the dominant reaction mechanism is the indirect pathway [8]. In order to obtain the desired efficiency in ozonation, it is very important that ozone dissolves in water [9]. As the temperature increases, the solubility of ozone in water decreases [10], but it cannot be said that ozonation effectiveness decreases as the solubility decreases. Because increasing the temperature increases the reaction rate [11]. On the other hand, temperature has a significant effect on the half-life of ozone. As the temperature increases, the half-life of ozone decreases due to its rapid decomposition and low stability [4].
Fig. 1
The chemistry of the ozone interaction with the indigo dyed cotton polymer [4]
Full size image
Ozone has various applications in textile. It is used as a process prior to dyeing of cellulosic, protein and synthetic fibers with the aim of bleaching, increasing dye-uptake potential of fiber, etc. Furthermore, it can also be used in washing after reactive dyeing and reductive clearing after disperse dyeing, and in color stripping [12]. The most commonly use of ozone technology is color fading of indigo dyed denim fabrics. There are various studies in the literature on fading the color of indigo dyed denim [1, 4, 7, 8, 13,14,15,16,17].
Ben Hmida et al. [1] found that the main oxidation by-product was isatin (1H-indole-2,3-dione), which formed in excess amounts on wet ozonated denim. Ben Hmida and Ladhari [4] identified the residual products of the indigo oxidation by ozone, the cause of the yellowing observed on the surface of the fabric through spectrophotometric measurements, pH variation and FTIR analysis. Ozone effect on mechanical properties of the fabric was studied through the measurement of ultimate tensile strength. Fraj and Jaouachi [7] applied ozone treatment to denim fabric samples to improve the effect of the washing conditions on the appearance and physical characteristics of the fabrics. Based on the obtained results, ozone treatment increased the whiteness value of treated fabrics. Moreover, it induced certain changes to the physical, mechanical and bagging properties of denim fabrics. Kamppuri et al. [8] observed that ozone was able to bleach the denim jeans and decreased the backstaining without the significant loss of the strength of the fabrics. Sancar Beşen and Balcı [14] investigated the possibility of obtaining of fading effect to indigo dyed denim yarns via ozonation process. Therefore, a novel approach was attempted for fading the denim materials in the form of yarn before weaving or garment processes. He et al. [15] investigated yarns of cotton, lyocell and PET treated by denim color fading ozonation in terms of the effects of time, pH and water content on their physical properties. It is found that, the cellulose in cotton and lyocell yarns has a loss of strength and elongation, while only slight impacts on their crystalline structures are observed. Hu et al. [16] studied three process factors used in the industrial scale color fading process, i.e. (i) ozone feed rate; (ii) moisture content in the fabric; and (iii) treatment time. Additionally, the color fading and tactility of fabric through ozonation were analyzed. Results showed that the three investigated factors have a significant impact on the fading effect, in which the treatment time was the most significant.
In this study, it was aimed to determine the effects of water content, treatment time and pH on both color fading and strength of the fabric during ozone treatment of denim textiles. Thus, optimum conditions of color fading with ozone in industrial applications have been revealed. Although studies conducted on small-scale samples provide insight into the subject, studies conducted under industrial-scale conditions are thought to be very important. Therefore, it is believed that this article, which was conducted directly under industrial-scale production conditions, is original and will contribute to the literature.
2 Materials and Methods
2.1 Materials
In this study, 14.5 oz 3/1 Z twill 100% organic cotton denim fabric, which is frequently used in the production of denim trousers was used. All the experiments were carried out by using soft mill water (0–1°F).
2.2 Ozone Treatment
Ozone treatments were carried out in a Jeanologia G2 ATMOS (Valencia, Spain) machine. The capacity of the ozone generator was 1200 g/h. In this study, water content, time and pH parameters affecting fading degree with ozone treatment were examined.
The treatments were carried out at room temperature due to the reasons explained in introduction part. After treatment the samples were rinsed with warm and cold water. The water content of the fabric was adjusted by spraying water whose pH was adjusted to 4, 7 or 11 on it with E-Flow Lab (Nanobubble micronization: 105–106 bubbles/cm3).
To optimize the ozone treatment, fabrics were treated at different water content values, ozone treatment time and pH of the impregnation liquor. Water content value optimization was tested at 10, 23, 30, 38 and 54% while the pH of the impregnation liquor and ozone treatment time were kept constant at pH 7 and 10 min respectively. The ozonation time was tested at 5, 10 and 15 min. while the pH of the impregnation liquor and water content value were kept constant at pH 7 and 30% respectively. The effect of pH was tested at pH 4 (adjusted with HCOOH), pH 7 and pH 11 (adjusted with NaOH) while the ozonation time and water content value were kept constant at 10 min and 30% respectively.
L* [lightness–darkness value (0: ideal black, 100: ideal white)] values of the fabric samples were measured in the spectral region of 400–700 nm at the maximum absorption wavelength by using X-RITE NIST TRACEABLE (COLOR i 5DV) spectrophotometer (D 65/10°). Then, the color fading values of samples treated with ozone in different conditions were calculated by using the below formula;
$${\text{Color}}\;{\text{fading}}\;{\text{value}}\;\left( \% \right) = \left( {L_{2} - L_{1} } \right)*100/L_{1} ,$$ (1)
L1: L* value of untreated sample; L2: L* value of ozonated sample.
Statistical evaluation of the color fading values (%) was made using Minitab 19 program through analysis of variance (ANOVA).
Fabric samples were also tested for tear strength according to BS EN ISO 13937-1 standard [18] using Elmatear Digital Tear Tester and breaking strength tests according to