Product & Services
Subscribe
Submit a paper
Browse
Rankings
Blog↗
Contact
Create account
Sign in
  This is a preprint article, it offers immediate access but has not been peer reviewed.
Download This Paper
Open PDF in Browser
Add Paper to My Library
Share:
Ozone Variations Over Antarctic Stations During Sudden Stratospheric Warmings
24 Pages Posted: 17 Jun 2024
Ruixian Yu
affiliation not provided to SSRN
Asen Grytsai
Taras Shevchenko National University of Kyiv
Alina Burmay
Taras Shevchenko National University of Kyiv
Gennadi Milinevsky
affiliation not provided to SSRN
Oleksandr Evtushevsky
Taras Shevchenko National University of Kyiv
Andrew Klekociuk
University of Adelaide
Yu Shi
affiliation not provided to SSRN
Oleksandr Poluden
affiliation not provided to SSRN
Xiaolong Wang
affiliation not provided to SSRN
Oksana Ivaniha
affiliation not provided to SSRN
Abstract
Understanding the connection between sudden stratospheric warmings (SSW) and variations in the zonally asymmetric response of the total ozone column (TOC) has application in better anticipating regional variations in surface ultraviolet radiation at extratropical latitudes. Here we examine the evolution of three SSW events in the Southern Hemisphere (SH) in September 1988, 2002 and 2019 which reveals new features of the zonally asymmetric response of TOC to SSW events. Our analysis is based on MSR-2 TOC data presented as time series for ten stations in the Antarctic and the sub-Antarctic region. We use superimposed epoch analysis for ±60 days relative to the central date of SSW, and the regional division of the time series between the Western and Eastern Hemispheres according to the climatological TOC asymmetry. The average zonally asymmetric response of TOC to the SSWs is characterized by generally stronger (weaker) positive anomalies in the Eastern (Western) Hemisphere, with the anomaly maximum occurring on day 0 (day +5). Synchronized anomalies are observed in the two hemispheres between day +5 and day +15 with a joint minimum near day +10 that is associated with a decrease in the amplitude of zonal wave 1 at 60°S and 50 hPa deduced from MERRA-2 reanalysis. During each SSW, stratospheric ozone depletion (ozone hole region) and accumulation (ozone collar region) impose differences in the latitude–longitude-depended TOC responses at Western (weaker) and Eastern (stronger) Hemisphere stations. The asymmetric TOC pattern is formed due to zonal wave 1 which displaces the ozone hole from the South Pole. The pattern is further enhanced by zonally asymmetric accumulation of ozone in the collar region. The time scale of synchronized wave and ozone variations during the SSW main stage in our composites is 10–15 days and the variations are quasi-periodic within a 120-day interval.
Keywords: total ozone column, Antarctic research stations, MSR-2 overpass data, sudden stratospheric warming, planetary waves
Suggested Citation:
Yu, Ruixian and Grytsai, Asen and Burmay, Alina and Milinevsky, Gennadi and Evtushevsky, Oleksandr and Klekociuk, Andrew and Shi, Yu and Poluden, Oleksandr and Wang, Xiaolong and Ivaniha, Oksana, Ozone Variations Over Antarctic Stations During Sudden Stratospheric Warmings. Available at SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4867777 or http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.4867777


















Download This Paper
Open PDF in Browser
73 References
D R Allen , R M Bevilacqua , G E Nedoluha , C E Randall , G L Manney
Unusual stratospheric transport and mixing during the 2002 Antarctic winter
Geophys. Res. Lett , volume 30 Posted: 2003
E A Agosta , P O Canziani
Interannual variations in the zonal asymmetry of the subpolar latitudes total ozone column during the austral spring
Geoacta , volume 35 , p. 1 - 16 Posted: 2010
S Bahramvash Shams , V P Walden , J W Hannigan , W J Randel , I V Petropavlovskikh , A H Butler , A De La Cámara
Analyzing ozone variations and uncertainties at high latitudes during sudden stratospheric warming events using MERRA-2
Atmos. Chem. Phys , volume 22 , p. 5435 - 5458 Posted: 2022
M P Baldwin , B Ayarzagüena , T Birner , N Butchart , A H Butler , A J Charlton-Perez , D I V Domeisen , C I Garfinkel , H Garny , E P Gerber , M I Hegglin , U Langematz , N M Pedatella
Sudden stratospheric warmings
Reviews of Geophysics , volume 59 Posted: 2020
Load more
0 Citations
Do you have a job opening that you would like to promote on SSRN?
Place Job Opening
Paper statistics
DOWNLOADS
4
ABSTRACT VIEWS
26
73 References
PlumX Metrics
Related eJournals
Environmental Science & Climate Change eJournal
Follow
Feedback
Submit a Paper
Section 508 Text Only Pages
SSRN Quick Links
SSRN Solutions
Research Paper Series
Conference Papers
Partners in Publishing
Jobs & Announcements
Special Topic Hubs
SSRN Rankings
Top Papers
Top Authors
Top Organizations
About SSRN
Network Directors
Announcements
Contact us
FAQs
Copyright Terms and Conditions Privacy Policy
All content on this site: Copyright © 2023 Elsevier Inc., its licensors, and contributors. All rights are reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. For all open access content, the Creative Commons licensing terms apply.
We use cookies to help provide and enhance our service and tailor content.
To learn more, visit Cookie Settings.
We use cookies that are necessary to make our site work. We may also use additional cookies to analyze, improve, and personalize our content and your digital experience. For more information, see ourCookie Policy
Cookie Settings
Accept all cookies