Journals & Books
Help
Search
My account
Sign in
Access through your institution
Purchase PDF
Article preview
Abstract
Introduction
Section snippets
References (74)
Cited by (221)
Journal of Cereal Science
Volume 51, Issue 3
, May 2010, Pages 248-255
Review
Application of ozone in grain processing
Author links open overlay panel
B.K. Tiwari a
,
C.S. Brennan b
,
T. Curran a
,
E. Gallagher c
,
P.J. Cullen d
,
C.P. O' Donnell a
Show more
Add to Mendeley
Share
Cite
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcs.2010.01.007
Get rights and content
Abstract
Ozone is an effective fumigant for insect killing, mycotoxin destruction and microbial inactivation which has a minimal or no effect on grain quality. Studies have demonstrated that ozone which is a natural agent, may offer unique advantages for grain processing along with addressing growing concerns over the use of harmful pesticides. This paper focuses on the efficacy of ozone for preservation of food grains and discusses the possible effects on product quality. Inactivation mechanisms for micro-organisms and mycotoxins are detailed. Critical intrinsic and extrinsic factors governing inactivation are discussed along with potential grain applications.
Introduction
Ozone finds wide application as a powerful disinfectant in water treatment, food processing and preservation and various other environmental applications. Ozone as an oxidant has numerous potential applications in the food industry because of its advantages over traditional food preservation techniques. Application of ozone either in gaseous or liquid form in fruit and vegetable processing is often employed for inactivation of pathogen and spoilage micro-organisms (Cullen et al., 2009). Apart from the wide spectrum of microbial inactivation, ozone also has the potential to kill storage pests and degrade mycotoxins. One of the potential advantages of ozone is that excess ozone auto-decomposes rapidly to produce oxygen and thus leaves no residues in food. Its efficacy against a wide range of micro-organisms including bacteria, fungi, viruses, protozoa, and bacterial fungal spores has been reported (Cullen et al., 2009, Khadre et al., 2001, Restaino et al., 1995). Such advantages make ozone attractive to the food industry and consequently it has been affirmed as Generally Recognized as Safe (GRAS) for use in food processing (Graham, 1997).
The possible application of ozone in food grain preservation would address the growing concern over the use of harmful pesticides to kill storage pests. The Montreal Protocol on substances that deplete the ozone layer (Fields and White, 2002), increased insect resistance, and increased consumer demand for chemical free grains has led grain processers to seek alternatives to control storage pests. Currently, commonly used pesticides (fumigants) for grain storage include aluminium phosphide, methyl bromide and phosphine. Among these, the use of methyl bromide is nearly phased out as agreed in the Montreal Protocol. The persistent use of these pesticides has been reported to disrupt biological control systems by natural agents, leading to outbreaks of insect pests, widespread development of resistance, undesirable effects on non-target organisms, and environmental and human health concerns (Collins et al., 2005, Islam et al., 2009, Kells et al., 2001, Pimentel et al., 2009, Pimentel et al., 2007). The increasing concern about their adverse effects has highlighted the need for the development of selective insect-control alternatives (Fields and White, 2002). Use of ozone as food grain fumigant is a viable alternative from both environmental and economical perspectives. For example, studies by a number of authors (Islam et al., 2009, Pereira et al., 2008b, Pereira et al., 2008a, Pimentel et al., 2009) show the economical viability of using ozone to fumigate stored maize based on an economic analysis of maize stored up to 6 months at 20 °C. This paper reviews the efficacy of ozone for the storage and preservation of food grains, the effect of ozonation on product quality and the current status of ozone application in grain processing.
Section snippets
Industrial production of ozone
The precursor for industrial production of ozone is that O2 is abundant and inexhaustible. Ozone (O3) results from the rearrangement of atoms when oxygen molecules are subjected to high-voltage electric discharge. The product is a bluish gas with pungent odour and strong oxidizing properties. Ozone is generated by the reaction of free oxygen radicals with diatomic oxygen to form triatomic oxygen molecules. Generation of the free oxygen radical occurs by breakage of strong O–O bonds, requiring a
Application of ozone in grain processing
The patented Oxygreen® process was one of the most significant advances for application of ozone in food grains (Dubois et al., 2006, Dubois et al., 2008). This process involves a premoistening of grains in a closed batch reactor followed by ozonation. Similarly, Yvin et al. (2001) patented a process to obtain flour with enhanced microbial safety from ozonated grains. Within the food industry, ozone is employed for fresh fruit and vegetable decontamination. However, a limited number of studies
Effects of ozone on the prevalence of storage pests
Grains are frequently stored for periods of up to 36 months at ambient temperatures in bulk silos and are often fumigated to prevent infestation and contamination (Kaushik et al., 2009). Within the grain processing industry, ozone is employed as a replacement for the existing fumigants such as methyl bromide and phosphine for the control of storage pests. Ozone as a fumigant is reported to kill stored-grain insects such as Tribolium castaneum, Rhyzopertha dominica, Oryzaephilus surinamensis,
Microbial decontamination and mycotoxins
Ozone in gaseous or aqueous form is reported to reduce levels of the natural microflora, as well as bacterial, fungal and mould contamination in cereals and cereal products, including spores of Bacillus, Coliform bacteria, Micrococcus, Flavobacterium, Alcaligenes, Serratia, Aspergillus and Penicillium (Naito and Takahara, 2006). Some studies show that up to 3 log reductions of micro-organisms in cereal grains, peas and beans can be achieved depending on ozone concentration, temperature and
Degradation of mycotoxins
Ozone is reported to be effective in the detoxification and degradation of commonly occurring mycotoxins such as aflatoxin, patulin, cyclopiazonic acid, secalonic acid D, ochratoxin A, and ZEN (Lemke et al., 1999, McKenzie et al., 1997). Table 2 lists reported effects of ozone treatment on fungal and mycotoxins in food grains. Similar to the killing of insects, fungal inactivation and subsequent decontamination of toxins depends upon several factors including ozone concentration, exposure time,
Effect on grain quality
Application of ozone at doses that are sufficient for the effective decontamination of grains may affect various quality attributes. The effects of ozone treatment on the quality and physiology of various food grains are reported in Table 3. Ozone is not universally beneficial and in some cases may promote oxidation degradation of chemical constituents present in the grains. Surface oxidation, discoloration or development of undesirable odours may occur from excessive use of ozone. Mendez
Conclusion
Within the grain processing industry, there is an increasing emphasis and trend toward the safe storage of food grains while minimizing qualitative and quantitative losses. Food laws and legislation to phase out chemical pesticides, increased pest resistance towards conventional fumigants and growing consumer demand for “greener” additives has forced processors, grain handlers, food scientists and entomologists to find alternatives. Ozone is an alternative method of grain disinfestation which
Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank Dr. Rip G. Rice, RICE International Consulting Enterprises for his valuable comments.
References (74)
C.A. Ballinger et al.
Antioxidant-mediated augmentation of ozone-induced membrane oxidation
Free Radical Biology & Medicine
(2005)
J. Bornholdt et al.
Inhalation of ozone induces DNA strand breaks and inflammation in mice
Mutation Research
(2002)
T.D. Burns et al.
Fumonisin concentrations and in vivo toxicity of nixtamalized Fusarium verticillioides culture material: evidence for fumonisin-matrix interactions
Food and Chemical Toxicology
(2008)
P.J. Collins et al.
Response of mixed-age cultures of phosphine-resistant and susceptible strains of lesser grain borer, Rhyzopertha dominica, to phosphine at a range of concentrations and exposure periods
Journal of Stored Products Research
(2005)
P.J. Cullen et al.
Modelling approaches to ozone processing of liquid foods
Trends in Food Science and Technology
(2009)
C. Desvignes et al.
Changes in common wheat grain milling behavior and tissue mechanical properties following ozone treatment
Journal of Cereal Science
(2008)
P.M. Foegeding
Ozone inactivation of Bacillus and Clostridium spore populations and the importance of the spore coat to resistance
Food Microbiology
(1985)
W.C.A. Gelderblom et al.
Structure-activity relationships of fumonisins in short-term carcinogenesis and cytotoxicity assays
Food and Chemical Toxicology
(1993)
Z. Güzel-Seydim et al.
Efficacy of ozone to reduce bacterial populations in the presence of food components
Food Microbiology
(2004)
Z.B. Guzel-Seydim et al.
Use of ozone in the food industry
Lebensmittel-Wissenschaft und-Technologie
(2004)
View more references
Cited by (221)
Recent developments in the application of physical processing techniques for controlling browning in fresh wet noodles: A review
2024, Journal of Cereal Science
Show abstract
Ozonation effects on structural and functional characteristics of starch
2024, Future Foods
Show abstract
Efficiency of cold atmospheric plasma under ozone (O<inf>3</inf>) and nitrogen oxide (NO<inf>x</inf>) regimes on the degradation of aflatoxins and ochratoxin A in solid state and in spiked pistachio kernels
2024, Food Control
Show abstract
Modeling ozone deposition on bulk grains and ozone deposition in columns of wheat grains
2023, Journal of Stored Products Research
Show abstract
Application of ozone in peanut kernels: A multiscale model approach and effects on filamentous fungi decontamination
2023, Journal of Food Engineering
Show abstract
Evaluation of cold plasma for decontamination of molds and mycotoxins in rice grain
2023, Food Chemistry
Show abstract
View all citing articles on Scopus
View full text
Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
Recommended articles
Ozone gas treatment against three main pests of stored products by combination of different application parameters
Journal of Stored Products Research, Volume 95, 2022, Article 101902
Barbara L. Ingegno, Luciana Tavella
Delineating the effect of gaseous ozone on disinfestation efficacy, protein quality, dehulling efficiency, cooking time and surface morphology of chickpea grains during storage
Journal of Stored Products Research, Volume 93, 2021, Article 101823
Nickhil C, …, Krishna Kumar Singh
Ozone for Food Decontamination: Theory and Applications
Handbook of Hygiene Control in the Food Industry, 2016, pp. 491-501
M.E. Oner, A. Demirci
Show 3 more articles
Article Metrics
Citations
Citation Indexes:
217
Policy Citations:
3
Captures
Readers:
254
Social Media
Shares, Likes & Comments:
24
View details
About ScienceDirect
Remote access
Shopping cart
Advertise
Contact and support
Terms and conditions
Privacy policy
Cookies are used by this site.
Cookie Settings
All content on this site: Copyright © 2024 Elsevier B.V., its licensors, and contributors. All rights are reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. For all open access content, the Creative Commons licensing terms apply.
We use cookies that are necessary to make our site work. We may also use additional cookies to analyze, improve, and personalize our content and your digital experience. For more information, see ourCookie Policy
Cookie Settings
Accept all cookies