Advertisement
Journals
Books
Sign in through your institution
Issues
More Content
Submit
Purchase
Alerts
About
Journal of Experimental Botany
This issue
Plant Sciences and Forestry
Books
Journals
Oxford Academic
Advanced Search
Volume 49 Issue 328
November 1998
Article Contents
Abstract
Author notes
Comments (0)
Next >
JOURNAL ARTICLE
Ozone depletion and increased UV-B radiation: is there a real threat to photosynthesis?
Damian J. Allen,
Salvador Nogués,
Neil R. Baker
Author Notes
Journal of Experimental Botany, Volume 49, Issue 328, November 1998, Pages 1775–1788, https://doi.org/10.1093/jxb/49.328.1775
Published: 01 November 1998 Article history
PDF
Split View
Cite
Permissions
Share
Abstract
This critical review of recent literature questions earlier predictions that photosynthetic productivity of higher plants is vulnerable to increased ultraviolet-B (UV-B) radiation as a result of stratospheric ozone (O3) depletion. Direct UV-B-induced inhibition of photosynthetic competence is observed only at high UV-B irradiances and primarily involves the loss of soluble Calvin cycle enzymes and adaxial stomatal closure in amphistomatous plants. However, even under these extreme UV-B exposures, acclimation (e.g. induction of UV-B absorbing flavonoids) can protect the photosynthetic processes. In plants irradiated with UV-B throughout development a reduction in productivity is usually associated with a reduced ability to intercept light (i.e. smaller leaf area) and not an inhibition of photosynthetic competence. Finally, a review of field experiments utilizing realistic UV-B enhancement is made to evaluate whether the mechanisms involved in UV-B-induced depressions of photosynthesis are likely to impact on the photosynthetic productivity of crops and natural vegetation in the future. Predictions of plant responses to O3 depletion are suspect from squarewave irradiance experiments in the field and controlled environments due to the increased sensitivity of plants to UV-B at relatively low photosynthetically-active photon flux densities (PPFD) and ultraviolet-A (UV-A) irradiances. Realistic modulated UV-B irradiances in the field do not appear to have any significant effects on photosynthetic competence or light-interception. It is concluded that O3 depletion and the concurrent rise in UV-B irradiance is not a direct threat to photosynthetic productivity of crops and natural vegetation.
Biomass, development, ozone depletion, photosynthesis, ultraviolet-B
PDF
This content is only available as a PDF.
Author notes
1
Present address: United States Department of Agriculture/Agricultural Research Service, Photosynthesis Research Unit, Urbana, Illinois 61801-3838, USA
© Oxford University Press 1998
Comments
0 Comments
Add comment
Advertisement
CITATIONS
233
VIEWS
2,711
ALTMETRIC
More metrics information
Email alerts
Article activity alert
Advance article alerts
New issue alert
Receive exclusive offers and updates from Oxford Academic
Recommended
Ultraviolet Radiation
Andrew R. Blaustein et al., University of California Press, 2005
Dry-matter Production of a Wheat Crop in Relation to Light interception and Photosynthetic Capacity of Leaves
A. M. OSMAN, Annals of Botany, 1971
UV light spectral response of photosynthetic photochemical efficiency in alpine mosses
Wei Ren et al., Journal of Plant Ecology, 2009
Investigation on surface plasmon polaritons and localized surface plasmon production mechanism in micro-nano structures
Ling-Xi Hu et al., Journal of Electronic Science and Technology, 2022
Are in-market control systems for sunscreens adequate for consumer protection? A review of the legal framework regulating sun protection factor labels in Europe
Aleix Bacardit, BMJ Public Health, 2023
Retrospective cohort study of wrong-patient imaging order errors: how many reach the patient?
Jerard Z Kneifati-Hayek et al., Qual Saf, 2023
Powered by
I consent to the use of Google Analytics and related cookies across the TrendMD network (widget, website, blog). For more information, see our Privacy Settings and Terms of Use.
Yes No
Citing articles via
Google Scholar
Latest
Most Read
Most Cited
Proximity driven plastid-nucleus relationships are facilitated by tandem plastid-ER dynamics
Cuticle Development And The Underlying Transcriptome-Metabolome Associations During Early Seedling Establishment
Invasion of the stigma by oomycete pathogenic hyphae or pollen tubes : striking similarities and differences
The Bitter Truth: How Insects Cope with Toxic Plant Alkaloids
Recent Insights into Salicylic Acid Accumulation: Emerging Molecular Players and Novel Perspectives on Plant Development and Nutrition
More from Oxford Academic
Biological Sciences
Plant Sciences and Forestry
Science and Mathematics
Books
Journals
About Journal of Experimental Botany
Editorial Board
Author Guidelines
Contact Us
Facebook
Twitter
YouTube
Purchase
Recommend to your Library
Advertising and Corporate Services
Journals Career Network
Online ISSN 1460-2431 Print ISSN 0022-0957 Copyright © 2024 Society for Experimental Biology
About Oxford Academic
Publish journals with us
University press partners
What we publish
New features 
Authoring
Open access
Purchasing
Institutional account management
Rights and permissions
Get help with access
Accessibility
Contact us
Advertising
Media enquiries
Oxford University Press
News
Oxford Languages
University of Oxford
Oxford University Press is a department of the University of Oxford. It furthers the University's objective of excellence in research, scholarship, and education by publishing worldwide
Copyright © 2024 Oxford University Press Cookie settings Cookie policy Privacy policy Legal notice
Oxford University Press uses cookies to enhance your experience on our website. By selecting ‘accept all’ you are agreeing to our use of cookies. You can change your cookie settings at any time. More information can be found in our Cookie Policy.
Reject and manage
Accept all