Register
Login
HOME
ABOUT
ISSUES
CURRENT
CONFERENCES
GUIDELINES
Search
Home Archives Vol. 4 No. 2 (2024): African Phytosanitary Journal Vol.4 Articles
Rice husk biochar for carbon sequestration, soil fertility and plant health improvement: A review
Main Article Content
Wachira Ephraim*, Nthakanio Njiru Paul, Yegon Rebbeca
Abstract
Carbon dioxide (CO2) is considered one of the ozone layer gases that contribute to climate change. As the area under agricultural use expands, the level of CO2 from soil as an agricultural by-product increases in the atmosphere. Burning rice husks in open air, decomposing plant materials among other activities release CO2 directly to the atmosphere. Rice husks as a by-product of rice production in Kenya has both the potential to be a source of greenhouse gas (GHG) and production of biochar. Production and deposition of rice husk biochar (RHB) into soil is thought to be one of the viable options for permanent carbon storage with related benefits to soil fertility. This review seeks to consolidate information from various studies that highlight the innovative way of using RHB in combating climate change, improving soil fertility, plant health and crop yields. Studies that have demonstrated beneficial use of RHB were evaluated to prepare this review. When RHB is used as a soil amendment, it has the ability to increase soil carbon storage, mitigate 10% of the current anthropogenic carbon emissions, improve pH and raise Cation Exchange Capacity (CEC), increase available plant nutrients, enhance inherent plant immunity, increase crop yields and improve water quality by increasing retention of nutrients and agrochemicals for plant utilization. A review of the benefits of RHB use in agriculture and climate change mitigation will enhance its adoption. The review further emphasizes the usefulness of pyrolysis in turning organic waste into bioenergy, compost and other beneficial products while protecting the environment.

Key Words: Carbon dioxide, climate change, global warming, innovation, ozone layer, temperature.
Article Sidebar
PDF
Published:
Jun 1, 2024
DOI: https://doi.org/10.52855/HKZC5394
Article Details
Issue
Vol. 4 No. 2 (2024): African Phytosanitary Journal Vol.4
Section
Articles
Make a Submission
Make a Submission
Information
For Readers
For Authors
For Librarians
Latest publications
Browse
Categories
Language
English
African Phytosanitary Journal
The African Phytosanitary Journal provides information on issues affecting plant health both locally and internationally. It provides a platform for the industry, research institutions, institutions of higher learning and the National Plant Protection Organizations (NPPOs) to present their findings on research on phytosanitary issues.
ISSN 2617-1856 (Print)
Quick Links
About the Journal
Editorial Team
Journal Submissions
Journal Contact
1st International Seed Quality Conference
Center of Phytosanitary Excellence Africa (COPE)
Kenya Plant Health Inspectorate Service(KEPHIS)
Contact
African Phytosanitary Journal
C/O Managing Director,
Kenya Plant Health Inspectorate Service
P.O. Box 49592-00100- City Square
Mobile: 0709891000 / 0734330016
Phone: +254-020-661 8000
Email 1: africanphytosanitaryjournal@kephis.org
Email 2: director@kephis.org
KEPHISOJS Hosting, Support, and Customization by: KEPHIS