This website utilizes technologies such as cookies to enable essential site functionality, as well as for analytics, personalization, and targeted advertising purposes. You may change your settings at any time or accept the default settings. You may close this banner to continue with only essential cookies. Data Storage Policy
Storage Preferences
Targeted Advertising
Personalization
Analytics
Save
Accept All
Reject All
RESEARCH AND ASSESSMENT OF THE ENVIRONMENTAL SECURITY OF BAKERY ENTERPRISES.
Source: Food Science & Technology (2073-8684) . 2020, Vol. 14 Issue 3, p122-129. 8p.
Author(s): Krusir, G.; Kondratenko, I.; Garkoviсh, A.; Shpyrko, T.; Lobotskaya, L.
Subject Terms: *ENVIRONMENTAL security   *NITRIC oxide   *COMBUSTION products   *WASTE gases   *ENERGY consumption   *NATURAL gas   *BREAD
Abstract: The paper considers how to decrease the concentration of nitrogen oxides in gas emissions of bakery enterprises. Nitrogen oxides (NO<sub>x</sub>) formed in the course of burning natural gas are responsible for more than 90% of an enterprise’s hazard category. So, it has been determined how much NO<sub>x</sub>is contained in exhaust gases emitted at different loadings on the floor of the oven at an enterprise, this parameter being the main characteristic of the effectiveness of ovens and their impact on the environment. The paper presents the results of experiments that have allowed determining the regression equations describing how the NO<sub>x</sub> quantity per unit of output in an enterprise’s exhaust gases depends on the amount of the fuel consumed and on the loading on the floor of baking ovens. The procedure of the experiments has been described, and the numerical results have been presented and analysed. It has been established that when making a loaf of wheat-flour oven-bottom bread weighing 0.9kg, with 70% loading on the floor of an oven (PPC1381), the nitrogen oxides concentration in combustion products is 212.00μg/m³, and the specific NO<sub>x</sub> formation is 292.25μg/kg. The nitrogen oxides concentration is 152.00μg/m3, and the specific formation is 306.00 μg/kg when the oven floor loading is 40%. If a similar range of products is baked in ovens Minel100 with the maximum-loaded and half-loaded oven floor, the production is accompanied by specific nitrogen oxide emissions of 239.50μg/kg and 247.80μg/kg respectively. When enriched buns of 0.1kg are baked in ovens BN50 with the maximum-loaded and half-loaded oven floor, the process is accompanied by specific nitrogen oxidee missions of 209.20μg/kg and 265.96μg/kg respectively. The nitrogen oxides content in gases withdrawn from bakery ovens has been instrumentally measured. This has allowed obtaining regression equations of dependence of the specific NO<sub>x</sub> weight in gas emissions on the amount of fuel consumed and on the oven floor loading. It has been found that in the ovens considered, the nitrogen oxide formation per output unit decreased when the oven floor loading increased, because less fuel is needed to make up for the loss of heat accompanying the emission of fumes. The contributions of the argument parameters have been determined according to the regression model to estimate the quantitative dependence. The amount of nitrogen oxides depends on the oven floor loading.A mathematical model has been developed describing how nitrogen oxide formation depends on the oven floor loading and fuel consumption. The model can be used to introduce an industry standard of quantification of nitrogen oxides formed when manufacturing a unit of output.
Copyright of Food Science & Technology (2073-8684) is the property of Odesa National University of Technology and its content may not be copied or emailed to multiple sites or posted to a listserv without the copyright holder's express written permission. However, users may print, download, or email articles for individual use. This abstract may be abridged. No warranty is given about the accuracy of the copy. Users should refer to the original published version of the material for the full abstract.
For access to this entire article and additional high quality information, please check with your college/university library, local public library, or affiliated institution.
Important User Information: Remote access to EBSCO's databases is permitted to patrons of subscribing institutions accessing from remote locations for personal, non-commercial use. However, remote access to EBSCO's databases from non-subscribing institutions is not allowed if the purpose of the use is for commercial gain through cost reduction or avoidance for a non-subscribing institution.
Privacy Policy A/B Testing Terms of Use Copyright Cookie Policy
© 2024 EBSCO Industries, Inc. All rights reserved.