Submit Article
Log in
Register
This journal
Journals
Publish
Clinical
Global health
Multimedia
Events
About
Advanced search
CORRESPONDENCE| VOLUME 43, 100982, AUGUST 2024
PDF [482 KB]
Figures
Save
Share
Reprints
Request
Short and mid-term impact of ozone on myocardial infarction incidence in Poland
Łukasz Kuźma
Emil J. Dąbrowski
Anna Kurasz
Michał Święczkowski
Piotr Jemielita
Sławomir Dobrzycki
et al.
Show all authors
Open AccessPublished:June 22, 2024DOI:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.lanepe.2024.100982
Contributors
Data sharing statement
Declaration of interests
Acknowledgements
Supplementary data
References
Article info
Figures
Linked Articles
We appreciate the commentary by Mark R. Miller on our analysis.1
,2
As a research group focused on investigating, gathering, and spreading scientific evidence on detrimental effects of air pollution on human health, we strongly support the author's viewpoint.
In the comment, the issue of potentially negative impact of ozone (O3) was raised. Although initially this gaseous pollutant was omitted due to our focus on constituents of Polish Smog, we have been able to supplement our recent paper regarding the impact of O3 on myocardial infarction (MI) incidence, using the previously described methodology.2
This is particularly relevant given recent data demonstrating the adverse effects of O3 on the incidence of cardiovascular disease (CVD).S1
In our study, the median concentration of O3 was 47.9 μg/m3 (IQR 34.3–60.9) with great seasonal and geographical variability. The exposure to O3 increased the risk of ST-elevation MI incidence on the day of exposure (RR 1.007, 95% CI 1.001–1.013, P = 0.026), especially in the rural areas (RR 1.009 95% CI 1.002–1.016, P = 0.009), with no effect on non-ST-elevation MI (Fig. 1).
Fig. 1Impact of ozone on myocardial infarction incidence in the analyzed region. Panel a, O3 concentrations in individual counties within the analyzed area. Panel b, O3 concentrations over the analyzed period. Panel c, association between exposure to O3 and STEMI incidence. Panel d, association between exposure to O3 and NSTEMI incidence. In two pollutant models, the effects were adjusted for pollutants other than O3. Abbreviations: BaP, benzoalphapyrene; O3, ozone; NO2, nitrogen dioxide; PM2.5, particulate matter with an aerodynamic diameter less than 2.5 microns; RR, relative risk; SO2, sulfur dioxide.
View Large Image Figure ViewerDownload Hi-res image Download (PPT)
In Polish smog, the main pollutants are particulate matter (PM) and polyaromatic hydrocarbons, mainly from burning low-quality fuels in residential furnaces. In rural areas, much of the air pollution comes from agriculture, emitting ammonia and NOₓ, which can convert into PM. Tropospheric O3 forms from photochemical reactions between NOₓ and volatile organic compounds. However, in areas with high NOₓ concentrations, O3 reacts with NO, forming NO2 and O2, reducing O3 levels. This dynamic balance means areas with high NOx concentrations typically have lower O3 levels, which is common in many urban areas.S2,S3
There are a limited number of studies assessing the differences arising from the influence of individual air pollution on the incidence of CVD comparing rural and urban areas.3
However, larger associations between mean air pollution concentrations and the incidence of CVD were observed in rural communities.3
Another study by Su et al. examining the impact of O3 demonstrated that female and rural residents face a heightened risk.4
O3 may be especially harmful in patients who have at least one cardiovascular risk factor, including atheromatous lesions, which may explain differences in its impact between various populations—as seen in our results.5
On the contrary, there are studies of O3 and MI that did not find any significant influence or even a protective effect.S4,S5
We believe that a new era of shifting the paradigm in CVD prevention is upon us, signaling the necessity to integrate environmental risk factors into established risk assessment scales, alongside extending mitigation strategies to encompass less urbanized area.
Contributors
Conceptualization, funding acquisition, methodology, project administration, investigation, validation and visualization were performed by Ł.K. Data curation and formal analysis were performed by Ł.K., M.Ś., E.J.D. All authors contributed to the writing of original draft, review and editing. Ł.K., S.D., G.Y.H.L. supervised the project.
Ł.K. and G.Y.H.L. directly accessed and verified the underlying data reported in the manuscript.
All authors had full access to all the data in the study, read and approved the final manuscript.
Data sharing statement
Data used for all analyses and analytic code whenever applicable are available from the corresponding author upon reasonable request.
Declaration of interests
GYHL: Consultant and speaker for BMS/Pfizer, Boehringer Ingelheim, Daiichi-Sankyo, Anthos. No fees are received personally. He is a National Institute for Health and Care Research (NIHR) Senior Investigator and co-PI of the AFFIRMO project on multimorbidity in AF (grant agreement No 899871), TARGET project on digital twins for personalised management of atrial fibrillation and stroke (grant agreement No 101136244) and ARISTOTELES project on artificial intelligence for management of chronic long term conditions (grant agreement No 101080189), which are all funded by the EU's Horizon Europe Research & Innovation programme. Other authors declare no conflicts of interest.
Acknowledgements
The study was financed from the funds of the National Science Center granted under the contract number UMO-2021/41/B/NZ7/03716 and Medical University of Bialystok contract numbers: UMB-B. SUB.23.509, UMB- B.SUB.23.290, UMB- B.SUB.23.102. Study sponsors had no influence on any stages of the study course.
The study was registered at ClinicalTrials.gov (NCT05198492).
Appendix A. Supplementary data
Download .docx (.06 MB)
Help with docx files
Supplementary Material
References
1.Miller M.R.
Air pollution and myocardial infarction in Poland.
Lancet Reg Health Eur. 2024; 41
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.lanepe.2024.100933
View in Article
Scopus (1)
PubMed
Summary
Full Text
Full Text PDF
Google Scholar
2.Kuźma Ł. Dąbrowski E.J. Kurasz A. et al.
Effect of air pollution exposure on risk of acute coronary syndromes in Poland: a nationwide population-based study (EP-PARTICLES study).
Lancet Reg Health Eur. 2024; 41
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.lanepe.2024.100910
View in Article
Scopus (2)
PubMed
Summary
Full Text
Full Text PDF
Google Scholar
3.Hystad P. Larkin A. Rangarajan S. et al.
Associations of outdoor fine particulate air pollution and cardiovascular disease in 157 436 individuals from 21 high-income, middle-income, and low-income countries (PURE): a prospective cohort study.
Lancet Planet Health. 2020; 4: e235-e245
View in Article
Scopus (116)
PubMed
Summary
Full Text
Full Text PDF
Google Scholar
4.Su B. Liu C. Chen L. Wu Y. Li J. Zheng X.
Long-term exposure to PM2.5 and O3 with cardiometabolic multimorbidity: evidence among Chinese elderly population from 462 cities.
Ecotoxicol Environ Saf. 2023; 255114790
View in Article
Scopus (2)
Crossref
Google Scholar
5.Henrotin J.-B. Zeller M. Lorgis L. Cottin Y. Giroud M. Béjot Y.
Evidence of the role of short-term exposure to ozone on ischaemic cerebral and cardiac events: the Dijon Vascular Project (DIVA).
Heart. 2010; 96: 1990-1996
View in Article
Scopus (58)
PubMed
Crossref
Google Scholar
Article info
Publication history
Published: June 22, 2024
Accepted: June 11, 2024
Received in revised form: June 6, 2024
Received: May 22, 2024
Identification
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.lanepe.2024.100982
Copyright
© 2024 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Ltd.
User license
Creative Commons Attribution – NonCommercial – NoDerivs (CC BY-NC-ND 4.0) | How you can reuse

ScienceDirect
Access this article on ScienceDirect
Figures
Fig. 1Impact of ozone on myocardial infarction incidence in the analyzed region. Panel a, O concentrations in individual counties within the analyzed area. Panel b, O concentrations over the analyzed period. Panel c, association between exposure to O and STEMI incidence. Panel d, association between exposure to O and NSTEMI incidence. In two pollutant models, the effects were adjusted for pollutants other than O. Abbreviations: BaP, benzoalphapyrene; O, ozone; NO, nitrogen dioxide; PM, particulate matter with an aerodynamic diameter less than 2.5 microns; RR, relative risk; SO, sulfur dioxide.
Linked Articles
Effect of air pollution exposure on risk of acute coronary syndromes in Poland: a nationwide population-based study (EP-PARTICLES study)
Full-Text
PDF
Open Access
Air pollution and myocardial infarction in Poland
Full-Text
PDF
Open Access
LANCET JOURNALS
The Lancet
The Lancet Child & Adolescent Health
The Lancet Diabetes & Endocrinology
The Lancet Digital Health
The Lancet Gastroenterology & Hepatology
The Lancet Global Health
The Lancet Haematology
The Lancet Healthy Longevity
The Lancet HIV
The Lancet Infectious Diseases
The Lancet Microbe
The Lancet Neurology
The Lancet Oncology
The Lancet Planetary Health
The Lancet Psychiatry
The Lancet Public Health
The Lancet Regional Health – Americas
The Lancet Regional Health – Europe
The Lancet Regional Health – Southeast Asia
The Lancet Regional Health – Western Pacific
The Lancet Respiratory Medicine
The Lancet Rheumatology
eBioMedicine
eClinicalMedicine
CLINICAL INITIATIVES
The Lancet Clinic
Commissions
Series
Picture Quiz
GLOBAL HEALTH INITIATIVES
Global Health Hub
Commissions
Series
Global Burden of Disease
Climate Countdown
MULTIMEDIA
Infographics
Podcasts
Videos
INFORMATION
About us
For authors
For advertisers
For press
Statement on offensive historical content
Open access
Publishing excellence
Community guidelines
Peer review
Preprints
ACCESS
Access our content
Personal subscriptions
Existing print subscribers
Request institutional access
Research4Life
CONNECT
Lancet Alerts
Lancet Webinars
Contact us
Customer service
Our global team
Conferences
The content on this site is intended for science and health care professionals.

We use cookies to help provide and enhance our service and tailor content and ads. To update your cookie settings, please visit the Cookie Settings for this site.
All content on this site: Copyright © 2024 Elsevier Ltd., its licensors, and contributors.
All rights are reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies.
For all open access content, the Creative Commons licensing terms apply.

Privacy Policy   Terms and Conditions   Accessibility

We use cookies that are necessary to make our site work. We may also use additional cookies to analyze, improve, and personalize our content and your digital experience. For more information, see ourCookie Policy
Cookie Settings
Accept all cookies