Log in
or
Register
Get new issue alerts
Secondary Logo
Journal Logo
Articles
Advanced Search
Articles and Issues
For Authors
Journal Info
ISEE




ORIGINAL RESEARCH ARTICLE
Prenatal air pollution and children’s autism traits score: Examination of joint associations with maternal intake of vitamin D, methyl donors, and polyunsaturated fatty acids using mixture methods
Bragg, Megan G.a,*; Gorski-Steiner, Irenab; Song, Ashleyb; Chavarro, Jorge E.c; Hart, Jaime E.d,e; Tabb, Loni P.f; Weisskopf, Marc G.e; Volk, Heatherb; Lyall, Kristena;  the Early Autism Risk Longitudinal Investigation (EARLI) Team
Collaborators
Author Information
Environmental Epidemiology 8(4):p e316, August 2024. | DOI: 10.1097/EE9.0000000000000316
OPEN
SDC
Metrics
Abstract
Background: 
Maternal nutrient intake may moderate associations between environmental exposures and children’s neurodevelopmental outcomes, but few studies have assessed joint effects. We aimed to evaluate whether prenatal nutrient intake influences the association between air pollutants and autism-related trait scores.
Methods: 
We included 126 participants from the EARLI (Early Autism Risk Longitudinal Investigation, 2009–2012) cohort, which followed US pregnant mothers who previously had a child with autism. Bayesian kernel machine regression and traditional regression models were used to examine joint associations of prenatal nutrient intake (vitamins D, B12, and B6; folate, choline, and betaine; and total omega 3 and 6 polyunsaturated fatty acids, reported via food frequency questionnaire), air pollutant exposure (particulate matter <2.5 μm [PM2.5], nitrogen dioxide [NO2], and ozone [O3], estimated at the address level), and children’s autism-related traits (measured by the Social Responsiveness Scale [SRS] at 36 months).
Results: 
Most participants had nutrient intakes and air pollutant exposures that met US standards. Bayesian kernel machine regression mixture models and traditional regression models provided little evidence of individual or joint associations of nutrients and air pollutants with SRS scores or of an association between the overall mixture and SRS scores.
Conclusion: 
In this cohort with a high familial likelihood of autism, we did not observe evidence of joint associations between air pollution exposures and nutrient intake with autism-related traits. Future work should examine the use of these methods in larger, more diverse samples, as our results may have been influenced by familial liability and/or relatively high nutrient intakes and low air pollutant exposures.
What this study adds
Maternal diet during pregnancy may moderate associations of air pollutants with children’s neurodevelopmental outcomes, including autism. Previous studies have examined nutrients and air pollutants as independent predictors of autism outcomes or have examined only individual nutrients as potential moderators. We used mixture models to examine the joint associations of a suite of nutrients and air pollutants with children’s autism-related traits. Although we found little evidence for individual or joint associations of exposures with autism-related traits in a familial autism cohort, this study highlights the ability of mixture models to examine complex associations of nutrients and environmental exposures with children’s neurodevelopment.
Introduction
Autism is a neurodevelopmental diagnosis characterized by challenges with social communication and the presence of restricted repetitive behaviors. In 2020, 1 in 36 US children aged 8 years old was diagnosed with autism.1 Evidence suggests that broader traits related to autism and social communication are distributed continuously among the general population and suggests the utility of quantitative trait measures in etiologic investigations of autism.2,3 While the etiology of autism is unclear, both genetic and environmental factors have been associated with autism diagnosis and quantitative traits related to the autism phenotype.4,5 For environmental exposures, evidence suggests the perinatal period represents a sensitive window for influences on autism development.6,7
One such environmental exposure with evidence for relationships with autism is air pollution. Exposure to criteria air pollutants, including fine particulate matter less than 2.5 micrometers (PM2.5), nitrogen dioxide (NO2), and ozone (O3), is ubiquitous and is influenced by traffic and industrial emissions.8 These exposures have been consistently associated with a range of neurodevelopmental and health outcomes, including autism diagnosis and quantitative traits,9,10 even at levels below US regulatory standards.11 It is hypothesized that air pollutants influence fetal brain development via increased oxidative stress, neuroinflammation, and altered gene methylation.12–14
Prenatal diet is another environmental factor that has been associated with children’s autism development and neurodevelopment more broadly. Intake of folate, vitamin D, and polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFAs) in particular has been inversely associated with autism and related traits.15 In addition to independent effects, nutrients may interact with environmental exposures through common biological pathways to either attenuate (when present in sufficient amounts) or exacerbate (when levels are suboptimal) neurodevelopmental effects.16,17 The interaction between prenatal diet and environmental toxins in relationship to neurodevelopmental outcomes was recently reviewed.18 There is suggestive evidence that prenatal nutrient intake may moderate the association of air pollutants and other environmental exposures with autism-related outcomes. For example, maternal intake of folic acid greater than 800 mcg in the first month of pregnancy attenuated the association between prenatal air pollutants and autism diagnosis among 760 children in a case–control study in California.19 Given that pregnant individuals may be better able to change their diet than their environmental air pollution exposure, this represents a potential target for public health messaging and interventions.
Although promising, previous work has been limited in the number of nutrients examined. For example, no studies have examined the moderating role of vitamin D or PUFAs on the association of air pollutants and autism, although a few studies have examined other environmental exposures and neurodevelopmental outcomes.20–23 In addition, although folate is hypothesized to act via changes to methylation pathways,24 other nutrients on the same pathways (vitamin B12, vitamin B6, choline, and betaine) have been less studied. Perhaps one reason the number of nutrients has been limited is the need for statistical techniques that can accommodate several potentially multicollinear exposures. Nutrient intakes are often highly correlated due to the combined consumption of foods and may also have biological interactions. Mixture methods such as Bayesian kernel machine regression (BKMR) are designed to assess mixture effects by reducing concerns about multicollinearity or multiple testing.25 Previously, we used BKMR to examine the association of multiple dietary factors with a quantitative autism traits score;26 however, to our knowledge, no studies have examined the association of both dietary factors and air pollutants with autism outcomes within a single mixture model.
The goal of this analysis was to evaluate the joint associations of prenatal air pollutant exposure and nutrient intake (vitamin D, folate, vitamin B12, vitamin B6, choline, betaine, total omega 3, and total omega 6 PUFAs) with autism traits scores using BKMR. As a comparison to test bivariate interactions and effect modification, we also performed traditional regression models of air pollutant exposure and autism traits score, stratified by nutrient intake. We hypothesized that air pollutants would be positively associated with autism traits and that this relationship would be attenuated with higher nutrient intake.
Methods
Study design and participants
This study uses data from the Early Autism Risk Longitudinal Investigation (EARLI; 2009-2012), which followed pregnant participants who had a previous child with autism.27 This cohort has an increased likelihood of autism given the high sibling recurrence risk.28 Eligibility criteria for EARLI included the ability to communicate in English or Spanish, being 18 years or older, living within 2 hours of a study site, and being less than 29 weeks pregnant. EARLI study sites were in four US locations (Philadelphia, PA [Drexel University], Baltimore, MD [Johns Hopkins University], San Francisco, CA [Kaiser Permanente Northern California], and Sacramento, CA [University of California, Davis]). Participants visited their study sites once per trimester and at birth to complete questionnaires and collect biological and environmental samples. Ethics approval for EARLI was obtained from the Drexel University Institutional Review Board, and all maternal participants provided written consent. To be selected for the current study, mother–child pairs needed to have a geocoded address during pregnancy, prenatal nutrient intake data, and measurement of children’s autism traits at 36 months of age. For sets of twins, one child was randomly excluded from the analysis.
Autism-related outcomes
Two autism-related outcomes were measured in EARLI: autism diagnosis and quantitative autism-related traits, as measured by the Social Responsiveness Scale (SRS),29 at 36 months of age. Due to the small sample size and limited number of autism cases, as well as the established use of continuous outcomes in BKMR models,25,26 SRS scores were used as the primary outcome in this analysis.
SRS scores were determined based on a 65-item caregiver report (SRS preschool version) to assess quantitative measures of autistic phenotype.29 Raw scores were generated by summing individual item scores, with higher SRS raw scores indicating higher expression of autism-related traits (i.e., more deficits in social communications).2 The SRS has been validated against gold-standard autism diagnostic tools (r > 0.6).30
Air pollution exposure estimation
Prenatal air pollution exposure was estimated at each residential address. Addresses were standardized and geocoded using the TeleAtlas US_Geo_2 database and software (Tele Atlas, Inc., Boston, CA, www.geocoded.com). Ozone exposures were derived using data from the US Environmental Protection Agency’s (EPA) Air Quality System (www.epa.gov/aqs). Weekly air quality data were spatially interpolated based on an inverse distance-squared weighting of data from up to four closest stations located within 50 km of each participant's residence;31 if one or more stations were located within 5 km of a residence, then only data from the stations within 5 km were used for interpolation. PM2.5 and NO2 exposures were derived using data from a spatiotemporal ensemble model that predicts daily concentrations at 1 km2 spatial resolution by integrating different machine learning algorithms and utilizing over 100 predictors including satellite measurements, land-use terms, meteorological variables, and chemical transport model predictions.32 ArcGIS Pro’s ModelBuilder tool was used to match pregnancy dates and geocoded addresses to the data extracted from this model and calculate daily exposure estimates for each mother–child pair.33 Estimates for each pollutant were averaged across pregnancy and by trimester. Air pollutant exposures were compared to current EPA primary annual standards for PM2.5 and NO2.8 The EPA does not have an annual standard for ozone, so no comparison with our data was made.
Nutrient intake calculation
Participants completed a validated food frequency questionnaire (the National Cancer Institute’s Diet History Questionnaire II34 slightly modified for pregnancy) at ~20 weeks gestation, representing the first half of pregnancy, and at the end of pregnancy, representing the second half. Data representing the first half of pregnancy were selected for primary analyses to maximize sample size and to align with previous work highlighting the importance of nutrient intake in the periconceptional and early pregnancy period.35,36 The questionnaire asked participants to report their average intake of a list of 124 foods and beverages. Nutrient intake was derived from the Diet History Questionnaire II using standard nutrient composition databases and then adjusted for total energy intake using the nutrient residual energy adjustment method.37 A separate questionnaire was administered to capture participants’ use of supplements during each month of pregnancy. Average nutrient intake from supplements was calculated for all nutrients except choline, betaine, and total omega 6 fatty acids, for which information on levels in supplements was unavailable. Data from nationally representative samples suggest that supplemental intake of these nutrients is uncommon among pregnant and lactating individuals.38 Total energy-adjusted nutrient intake from diet and, where available, from supplements was calculated. A suite of high-priority nutrients was identified based on previous associations with autism outcomes:15 vitamin D, folate, and other nutrients involved in methylation pathways (vitamin B12, vitamin B6, choline, and betaine), and total omega 3 and total omega 6 PUFAs. When available, the percentage of participants with intake above the US National Academies of Science and Medicine Recommended Dietary Allowance (RDA), Adequate Intake (AI), and Upper Level (UL) during pregnancy was calculated for each nutrient.
Statistical analysis
Characteristics of those included in this analysis versus the overall EARLI sample were compared. We then examined univariate distributions and bivariate relations among study variables to check for collinearity and confounding using variance inflation factors, scatterplots, box plots, and Spearman correlations. All models were run unadjusted and adjusted for covariates.
We employed BKMR to examine associations of exposures with SRS score. BKMR captures high dimensional, complex exposure–response associations and can investigate interactions among multiple exposures.25 Analyses were performed using the R package bkmr (R Core Team, Vienna, Austria). Additionally, the R package bkmrhat was used to assess model fit. The number of iterations was increased until convergence was achieved.25 Air pollutants and nutrients are hypothesized to be positively and negatively associated with autism trait scores, respectively. For clearer