Browse
Search
Publish
Login  |  Register
Home All Journals Journal of Asthma List of Issues Latest Articles Meteorological factors and climate chang ....
Search in:
This Journal
Anywhere
Advanced search
Journal of Asthma
Latest Articles
Submit an article Journal homepage
65
Views
0
CrossRef citations to date
0
Altmetric
Review Article
Meteorological factors and climate change impact on asthma: a systematic review of epidemiological evidence
Jamila Rida
, MD, Youssef Bouchriti
, PhD, Mohamed Ait Haddou
, PhD, Abderrahmane Achbani
, PhD, Hasnaa Sine
, PhD & Hind Serhane
, PhD
Received 01 Jun 2024, Accepted 28 Jun 2024, Published online: 04 Jul 2024
Cite this article https://doi.org/10.1080/02770903.2024.2375272
  Full Article Figures & data References Citations Metrics Reprints & Permissions Read this article
Abstract
Objective
This systematic review aimed to investigate the epidemiological data about meteorological factors and climate change (CC) impact on asthma.
Data sources
A search was performed using three databases (Web of Science, Science Direct, and MEDLINE) for all relevant studies published from January 1, 2018, to December 31, 2022.
Study selections
This systematic review complied with the PRISMA document’s requirements, including studies related to meteorological factors and CC impact on asthma. The search included studies published in English or French language, and was based on title, abstract, and complete text. Documents not meeting inclusion requirements were excluded.
Results
We identified 18 studies published in the last five years that were eligible for inclusion in this review. We found that these studies concerned European, Asian, American, and Oceanic cities. Extreme variations in temperature, humidity, wind speed, exceptional incidents like hurricanes, cold and heat waves, and seasonal shifts were strongly correlated with the worsening of asthmatic symptoms, particularly in childhood. In addition, excessive concentrations of air pollutants and aeroallergens were linked to pediatric asthma emergency hospital admissions.
Conclusions
A significant association between the consequences of CC and asthma in adults particularly in children has been demonstrated. Future research should quantify the impact of global change in climate regarding the aeroallergens’ distribution in terms of geography and time. It is also necessary to research the impact of air pollution on asthmatic health, like sulfur dioxide (SO2), nitrogen dioxide (NO2), ozone (O3), and particles having an aerodynamic diameter lower than 2.5 µm (PM2.5).
Keywords: Aeroallergensair pollutionasthmaclimate changemeteorological parameters
Disclosure statement
The authors report there are no competing interests to declare. The authors have also adhered strictly to all ethical guidelines regarding redundancy, plagiarism, informed consent, misconduct, data fabrication and/or falsification, double publishing and/or submission, and redundancy.
Life science reporting
This study used no practices that pose a threat to life sciences.
Correction Statement
This article has been corrected with minor changes. These changes do not impact the academic content of the article.
Additional information
Funding
The author(s) reported there is no funding associated with the work featured in this article.
Related research

People also read
Recommended articles
Cited by
Information for
Authors
R&D professionals
Editors
Librarians
Societies
Open access
Overview
Open journals
Open Select
Dove Medical Press
F1000Research
Opportunities
Reprints and e-prints
Advertising solutions
Accelerated publication
Corporate access solutions
Help and information
Help and contact
Newsroom
All journals
Books
Keep up to date
Register to receive personalised research and resources by email
Sign me up
Copyright © 2024Informa UK Limited Privacy policy Cookies Terms & conditions Accessibility
Registered in England & Wales No. 3099067
5 Howick Place | London | SW1P 1WG




Cookies Button
We Care About Your Privacy
We and our 842 partners store and/or access information on a device, such as unique IDs in cookies to process personal data. You may accept or manage your choices by clicking below, including your right to object where legitimate interest is used, or at any time in the privacy policy page. These choices will be signaled to our partners and will not affect browsing data.Privacy Policy
We and our partners process data to provide:
Use precise geolocation data. Actively scan device characteristics for identification. Store and/or access information on a device. Personalised advertising and content, advertising and content measurement, audience research and services development.
List of Partners (vendors)
I Accept
Essential Only
Show Purposes