Product & Services
Subscribe
Submit a paper
Browse
Rankings
Blog↗
Contact
Create account
Sign in
  This is a preprint article, it offers immediate access but has not been peer reviewed.
Download This Paper
Open PDF in Browser
Add Paper to My Library
Share:
A Combined Dft and Experimental Study for the Synergistic Removal of Nox and Toluene on Fevo4/Tio2 Catalysts: Insights from Redox Ability and Charge Transfer
33 Pages Posted: 26 Jun 2024
Yangwen Wu
North China Electric Power University
Yi-fei Yu
North China Electric Power University
Zheng-long Wu
North China Electric Power University
Rong Guo
North China Electric Power University
Hai-yuan Zhao
North China Electric Power University
Xin-yue Zhou
North China Electric Power University
Bing Zhang
North China Electric Power University
Li Zhao
North China Electric Power University
Qiang Lu
North China Electric Power University
Abstract
Synchronously eliminating nitrogen oxides (NOx) and volatile organic compounds (VOCs) via the existing deNOx devices can effectively prevent the generation of fine particulate matter and ozone. In this work, FeVO4 was selected to replace V2O5 in commercial ammonia-based selective catalytic reduction (NH3-SCR) catalysts owing to its low biotoxicity. The catalytic behavior and structure-reactivity relationship of the FeVO4/TiO2 catalyst in the simultaneous degradation of NOx and VOCs were systematically evaluated. Satisfactory NOx reduction and VOC oxidation performance was obtained for the 11 wt.% FeVO4/TiO2 catalyst at 300-400℃, whose abundant active oxygen species as well as vacancies primarily advantaged the excellent catalytic activity. Furthermore, the vigorous coaction between FeVO4 components and TiO2 substrate promoted the formation of oxygen vacancies, thus accelerating the catalytic reactions. Density functional theory (DFT) calculations further verified the charge transfer between Fe and V within the FeVO4 cluster, which modified the surface electronic structure and enriched V5+, thereby strengthening the surface activity.
Keywords: NOx, VOCs, synergistic removal, FeVO4/TiO2, Density functional theory
Suggested Citation:
Wu, Yangwen and Yu, Yi-fei and Wu, Zheng-long and Guo, Rong and Zhao, Hai-yuan and Zhou, Xin-yue and Zhang, Bing and Zhao, Li and Lu, Qiang, A Combined Dft and Experimental Study for the Synergistic Removal of Nox and Toluene on Fevo4/Tio2 Catalysts: Insights from Redox Ability and Charge Transfer. Available at SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4877383 or http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.4877383




































Download This Paper
Open PDF in Browser
82 References
K Zhang , N Luo , Z Huang , G Zhao , F Chu , R Yang , X Tang , G Wang , F Gao , X Huang
Recent advances in low-temperature NH 3 -SCR of NO x over Ce-based catalysts: Performance optimizations, reaction mechanisms and anti-poisoning countermeasures
Chem. Eng. J , volume 476 Posted: 2023
H Wang , B Yuan , R Hao , Y Zhao , X Wang
A critical review on the method of simultaneous removal of multi-air-pollutant in flue gas
Chem. Eng. J , volume 378 Posted: 2019
B Liu , J Ji , B Zhang , W Huang , Y Gan , D Y C Leung , H Huang
Catalytic ozonation of VOCs at low temperature: A comprehensive review
J. Hazard. Mater , volume 422 Posted: 2022
Y Shan , Y Liu , Y Li , W Yang
A review on application of cerium-based oxides in gaseous pollutant purification
Sep. Purif. Technol , volume 250 Posted: 2020
Load more
0 Citations
Do you have a job opening that you would like to promote on SSRN?
Place Job Opening
Paper statistics
DOWNLOADS
1
ABSTRACT VIEWS
29
82 References
PlumX Metrics
Related eJournals
Computational & Theoretical Chemistry eJournal
Follow
Feedback
Submit a Paper
Section 508 Text Only Pages
SSRN Quick Links
SSRN Solutions
Research Paper Series
Conference Papers
Partners in Publishing
Jobs & Announcements
Special Topic Hubs
SSRN Rankings
Top Papers
Top Authors
Top Organizations
About SSRN
Network Directors
Announcements
Contact us
FAQs
Copyright Terms and Conditions Privacy Policy
All content on this site: Copyright © 2023 Elsevier Inc., its licensors, and contributors. All rights are reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. For all open access content, the Creative Commons licensing terms apply.
We use cookies to help provide and enhance our service and tailor content.
To learn more, visit Cookie Settings.
We use cookies that are necessary to make our site work. We may also use additional cookies to analyze, improve, and personalize our content and your digital experience. For more information, see ourCookie Policy
Cookie Settings
Accept all cookies