Processing math: 100%
Top bar navigation
About us
All journals
All articles
Submit your research
Search
Login
Frontiers in Environmental Science
Sections
Articles
Research Topics
Editorial board
About journal
Download article
375
Total views
86
Downloads
View article impact
View altmetric score
Share on
Edited by
Sayali Sandbhor
Symbiosis Institute of Technology, Symbiosis International University, India
Reviewed by
ARABINDA MAITI
Vidyasagar University, India
Seyed Vahid Razavi-Termeh
Sejong University, Republic of Korea
Table of contents
Abstract
1 Introduction
2 Materials and methods
3 Results
4 Discussion
5 Conclusion
Data availability statement
Author contributions
Funding
Conflict of interest
Publisher’s note
References
Export citation
Check for updates
People also looked at
ORIGINAL RESEARCH article
Front. Environ. Sci., 09 July 2024
Sec. Big Data, AI, and the Environment
Volume 12 - 2024 | https://doi.org/10.3389/fenvs.2024.1399339
This article is part of the Research Topic
Artificial Intelligence in Environmental Engineering and Ecology: Towards Smart and Sustainable Cities
View all 6 articles
Enhancing spatial modeling and risk mapping of six air pollutants using synthetic data integration with convolutional neural networks
Abed Bashardoost1Mohammad Saadi Mesgari1Mina Karimi1,2*
1GIS Department, Faculty of Geodesy and Geomatics Engineering, K. N. Toosi University of Technology, Tehran, Iran
2Department of Geography and Regional Research, University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria
Air pollution poses significant risks to human health and the environment, necessitating effective air quality management strategies. This study presents a novel approach to air quality management by integrating an autoencoder (AE) with a convolutional neural network (CNN) algorithm in Tehran city of Iran. One of the primary and vital problems in deep learning is model complexity, and the complexity of a model is affected by data distribution, data complexity, and information volume. AE provide a helpful way to denoise input data and make building deep learning models much more efficient. The proposed methodology enables spatial modeling and risk mapping of six air pollutants, namely, particulate matter 2.5 (PM2.5), particulate matter 10 (PM10), sulfur dioxide (SO2), nitrogen dioxide (NO2), ozone (O3), and carbon monoxide (CO). For air pollution modelling, data from a spatial database containing the annual average of six pollutants from 2012 to 2022 was utilized. The model considered various parameters influencing air pollution: altitude, humidity, distance to industrial areas, NDVI (normalized difference vegetation index), population density, rainfall, distance to the street, temperature, traffic volume, wind direction, and wind speed. The risk map accuracy was assessed using the area under the receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve for six pollutants. Among them, NO2, PM10, CO, PM2.5, O3, and SO2 exhibited the highest accuracy with values of 0.964, 0.95, 0.896, 0.878, 0.877, and 0.811, respectively, in the risk map generated by the CNN-AE model. The findings demonstrated the CNN-AE model’s impressive precision when generating the pollution risk map.
1 Introduction
Pollution occurs when toxic substances enter the environment and impact humans and other organisms. Pollutants refer to harmful substances (solids, liquids, or gases) present in higher-than-normal concentrations and harm the environment’s quality (Manisalidis et al., 2020). Furthermore, increasing population growth in large cities has intensified air pollution, a significant environmental repercussion. This situation has been exacerbated by various factors, including the rise in the utilization of heating devices, the presence of industrial centers, increased commercial activities, and the reliance on fossil fuels for transportation and traffic (Shogrkhodaei et al., 2021). Since cities contain a large population, they have the highest load of ambient air pollution. According to statistics announced by the World Health Organization (WHO), about 9 out of 10 people (approximately 91% of the world’s population) are exposed to a high level of air pollution (Agarwal, 2021). Air pollution has many effects on human life, and poor air quality leads to the death of three million people annually (Sakti et al., 2023). The impact of air pollution includes an increase in cardiovascular and respiratory diseases, diabetes and blood pressure, dementia, the chance of miscarriage in pregnancy, early psychiatric and mental mortality, memory issues, the impairment of cognitive function, and a decrease in life expectancy. Severe air pollution can lead to an increase in criminal and immoral behavior, a reduction in the happiness of city dwellers, and a decrease in the potential of solar energy (Liu et al., 2020).
The uncontrolled expansion of urban areas and the rapid growth of industries have significantly diminished the quality of life and the environment in developing nations. Consequently, there is a pressing need to evaluate the geographical dispersion of air quality and its impact on human populations residing in metropolitan regions (Sengupta et al., 1996). The issues stemming from air pollution and their potential threat to human life underscore the significance of diligent air quality monitoring. Such monitoring is crucial for precise air quality regulation and effective urban management (Ma et al., 2019). It is essential to control and reduce ambient air pollutants, improve air quality, and maintain public health in urban areas. This is possible by developing appropriate strategies and policies and investigating and understanding the spatial changes of ambient air pollutants because being modifiable and reversible is one of the characteristics of ambient air pollution (Faridi et al., 2019). For analyzing air quality in a city, pollution maps, which show the average pollution level in a certain period, are considered a suitable tool (Szopińska et al., 2022).
It is necessary to understand the location to find the right solution for the population health problems caused by air pollution. The location of people in cities plays a vital role in exposure to air pollution (Zou et al., 2014). Therefore, the spatial analysis of air pollution can lead to the understanding of the location of pollutants in the city. Spatial analysis can help people solve complex location-based problems. The spatial analysis involves comprehending various aspects, including the distinctive features of a place, the interconnections between different locations, and the incidence of events within specific geographical areas (Farahani et al., 2022). It is possible to perform spatial analysis and solve spatial problems using a geographic information system (GIS) (Lü et al., 2019). In GIS, the first step in processing and analyzing any phenomenon is the spatial modeling of that phenomenon (Hogland and Anderson, 2017). GIS is a fundamental tool utilized in air pollution modeling. It enables the extraction and processing of spatial data necessary as input for air pollution models and the visualization of the models’ outcomes (Makarovskikh and Herreinstein, 2022). GIS provides the results of urban air quality in the form of maps, which are very visual and can be easily interpreted even by non-specialists. He also analyzed these maps according to their complexity and user ability (Mavroulidou et al., 2004). Spatial analysis and overlay techniques available in GIS provide a powerful tool for pollution mapping (Briggs et al., 1997). GIS is essential for spatially monitoring air quality and creating spatial models to predict future air quality conditions ((Gulliver and Briggs, 2011; Somvanshi et al., 2019). Researchers use GIS techniques in various fields of air pollution investigation, such as analyzing air pollutants’ spatial and temporal distribution (Kumar et al., 2016; Razavi-Termeh et al., 2021) and converting point data to surface data in studying the spatial distribution of air pollutants (Bell, 2006) have used.
So far, various methods such as land use regression (LUR), machine learning, and deep learning have been used to monitor and model air pollutants. Among the research conducted using the LUR method are: Mölter et al. (2010) estimated annual mean nitrogen dioxide (NO2), and particulate matter 10 (PM10) concentrations from 1996 to 2008 for Manchester using LUR models. Xu et al. (2019) investigated national particulate matter 2.5 (PM2.5) and NO2 exposure models based on China’s LUR, satellite measurements, and kriging method. Shi et al. (2020) studied a temporal LUR model for assessing ambient PM2.5 in Pakistan. Xu et al. (2022) used the 3D LUR method to assess PM2.5 exposure in central Taiwan. Ge et al. (2022) investigated the LUR method to determine exposure to ultrafine particles (UFP) in Shanghai, China. LUR models usually cannot be generalized to places other than the place developed for them, and optimizing the features for new models in specific study areas is a cumbersome process (Steininger et al., 2020). Another weakness of the LUR model is the need for experimental data (Dons et al., 2014). To address the limitations of the LUR method, machine learning algorithms have been developed to establish nonlinear and intricate relationships between observations and predictive variables. These algorithms offer several advantages, including rapid processing speed, higher efficiency compared to traditional models, and the absence of a requirement for statistical assumptions (Shogrkhodaei et al., 2021). One notable advantage of machine learning-based methods is their ability to operate without an in-depth understanding of atmospheric pollutants’ physical or chemical properties (Bekkar et al., 2021). Machine learning methods generally work well and can identify data patterns quickly. Studies that have been used machine learning algorithms to investigate air pollution are described as follows: Hu et al. (2016) introduced a dense air pollution estimation model based on support vector regression (SVR) using a static and wireless sensor network. The results showed that air pollution estimations through this method have high spatial resolution and are more accurate than artificial neural network (ANN) model estimations. Delavar et al. (2019) investigated a new method to improve air pollution prediction based on machine learning approaches (SVR, geographically weighted regression, ANN, and auto-regressive nonlinear neural network with external input). According to their findings, the autoregressive nonlinear neural network that utilizes the proposed prediction model and external information is the most dependable algorithm for predicting air pollution. Castelli et al. (2020) investigated a machine-learning approach to predict air quality in California. The results indicated the possibility of predicting the concentration of carbon monoxide (CO), sulfur dioxide (SO2), NO2, ozone (O3), and PM2.5 as well as air quality index (AQI) for the state of California with the SVR with radial basis function (RBF) kernel. Shogrkhodaei and colleagues (2021) conducted a study in Tehran, focusing on the spatial-temporal modeling of PM2.5 risk mapping. Their analysis used three machine learning algorithms - random forest (RF), AdaBoost, and stochastic gradient descent (SGD) -. Abu El-Magd et al. (2022) employed a machine learning approach to develop a PM pollution susceptibility map using time series data of PM pollution records. The findings demonstrated that the generated prediction maps are reliable and could aid in enhancing air quality monitoring in the future.
Much research has been done on air pollution using deep learning algorithms in recent years. Deep learning algorithms have been preferred over machine learning models for greater flexibility and predictive accuracy (especially for big data) (Ghorbanzadeh et al., 2019). Deep learning, having advantages such as using more layers, more expansive data sets, and processing all layers simultaneously to obtain more accurate results, is suitable for modeling and forecasting air pollution (Bekkar et al., 2021). The following studies have been reviewed that investigated air pollution through the deep learning method. Bui et al. (2018) investigated a deep learning approach for forecasting air pollution using long short-term memory (LSTM) in South Korea. The proposed model showed significant results in predicting PM2.5 in the long future based on historical meteorological data. Kalajdjieski et al. (2020) predicted air pollution with multi-modal data and deep neural networks (DNN). The results showed the substantial accuracy of this method, which was comparable to sequence models and conventional models that use air pollution data. Zaini et al. (2022) utilized a hybrid deep learning model to forecast hourly PM2.5 concentration in an urban region of Malaysia. The outcomes revealed that the EEMD-LSTM model had the best accuracy compared to other deep learning models, and the combined prediction model outperformed the individual models. In the deep learning method, over fitting may happen with random noise in the data. Also, one of the primary and vital problems in deep learning is model complexity, and the complexity of a model is affected by data distribution, data complexity, and information volume (Hu et al., 2021). Autoencoders (AE) provide a helpful way to denoising input data and make building deep learning models much more efficient. Among the uses of AE is the ability to identify anomalies, deal with unsupervised learning problems, and remove complexity in data sets (Bank et al., 2020). Combining deep learning with AE in studies such as spatiotemporal modeling and prediction in cellular networks (Wang et al., 2017), traffic flow prediction with big data (Lv et al., 2014), and pollution map recovery with mobile sensing networks (Ma et