Loading [MathJax]/jax/output/HTML-CSS/config.js
Your privacy, your choice
We use essential cookies to make sure the site can function. We, and our 209 partners, also use optional cookies and similar technologies for advertising, personalisation of content, usage analysis, and social media.
By accepting optional cookies, you consent to allowing us and our partners to store and access personal data on your device, such as browsing behaviour and unique identifiers. Some third parties are outside of the European Economic Area, with varying standards of data protection. See our privacy policy for more information on the use of your personal data. Your consent choices apply to springer.com and applicable subdomains.
You can find further information, and change your preferences via 'Manage preferences'.
You can also change your preferences or withdraw consent at any time via 'Your privacy choices', found in the footer of every page.
We use cookies and similar technologies for the following purposes:
Store and/or access information on a device
Personalised advertising and content, advertising and content measurement, audience research and services development
Accept all cookies
Reject optional cookies
Manage preferences
Skip to main content
Advertisement
Log in
Find a journal
Publish with us
Track your research
Search
Cart
Home Maternal and Child Health Journal Article
Ambient Air Pollution, Housing Context, and Birth Outcomes Among Wisconsin Mothers
Open access
Published: 07 June 2024
(2024)
Cite this article
Download PDF
You have full access to this
open access
article
Maternal and Child Health Journal
Aims and scope
Submit manuscript
Amy K. Fottrell, Marah A. Curtis & Fiona H. Weeks 
375 Accesses
2 Altmetric
Explore all metrics
Abstract
Objectives
To assess the association between air pollution exposure and housing context during pregnancy and adverse birth outcomes.
Methods
We linked air pollution data from the Environmental Protection Agency and housing data from the American Community Survey with birth records from Wisconsin counties over a 9-year period. We calculated average daily pregnancy exposure to fine particulate matter and ozone and modeled its relationship to preterm birth, low birthweight and NICU admission, adjusting for individual characteristics and housing context.
Results
Ozone exposure and housing cost-burden had substantive and statistically significant negative associations with birthweight and gestational age, and positive associations with NICU admission, while a poor-quality housing environment had a significant negative effect on weeks of gestation. Fine particulate matter exposure had a negligible correlation with these outcomes.
Conclusions for practice
An additional tenth of one part-per-million daily average exposure to ozone is associated with a 33 g decrease in birthweight. This decrease in birthweight is about the same size as the association of gestational diabetes (32 g), larger than the association of chronic hypertension (22 g), and about 40% the size of the effect of smoking during pregnancy on birthweight (84 g). Given the magnitudes of the associations with atmospheric ozone and adverse birth outcomes, reducing atmospheric ozone should be a public health priority. Inclusion of controls for housing cost-burden and poor-quality housing reduces the magnitude of the association with mothers who identify as Black, suggesting the importance of these structural factors in understanding adverse birth outcomes by race.
Significance
What is already known on this subject
It is well documented that poor birth outcomes are linked to experiences of social and economic disadvantage, however, environmental correlates of poor birth outcomes are under-researched. Existing research does not account for the ways in which environmental, sociodemographic, and structural factors could confound each other given the concentration of environmental pollutants in communities of color and low-income communities.
What this study adds
In this paper, we account for individual sociodemographic characteristics, access to emergency infant healthcare, and neighborhood housing factors to clarify the independent association of air pollution on birth outcomes in Wisconsin across a nine-year period.
Similar content being viewed by others
The relationship between air pollutants and maternal socioeconomic factors on preterm birth in California urban counties
Article Open access
15 April 2021
The effect of ambient air pollution on birth outcomes in Norway
Article Open access
14 November 2023
Air pollution, neighbourhood and maternal-level factors modify the effect of smoking on birth weight: a multilevel analysis in British Columbia, Canada
Article Open access
16 July 2016
Introduction
In Wisconsin in 2019, 10.1% of all babies were born preterm, and 7.6% were born with low birthweight (< 2500 g) (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 2022). Preterm birth and low birthweight contributed to about 16% of infant deaths in 2020 in the United States (Ely & Driscoll, 2022). Moreover, negative birth outcomes, including preterm birth and low birthweight, can affect the long-term health of infants even into adulthood including increasing risk for high blood pressure, obstructive lung disease, diabetes, and cognitive deficiencies (Luu et al., 2017). These health issues place burdens on families as well as on the broader healthcare system and economy (Petrou et al., 2001). It is well documented that poor birth outcomes are linked to experiences of social and economic disadvantage (Aizer & Currie, 2014; Blumenshine et al., 2010); however, environmental correlates of poor birth outcomes are under-researched. Although some recent papers consider the association of green space, (Laurent et al., 2019) housing quality, (Miranda et al., 2012; Suglia et al., 2011) and air pollution (Ibrahimou et al., 2014) on low birthweight across the United States, they do not consider the combined associations of multiple environmental factors.
Low-income communities are more likely to be exposed to air pollution, have less access to healthcare, experience pre-existing health conditions, and have lower quality housing stock (Hood, 2005; Lazar & Davenport, 2018). Existing research does not account for the ways in which environmental, sociodemographic, and structural factors could confound each other given the concentration of environmental pollutants in communities of color and low-income communities (Colmer et al., 2020). In this paper, we account for individual sociodemographic characteristics, access to emergency infant healthcare, and neighborhood housing factors to clarify the independent association of air pollution on birth outcomes in Wisconsin across a nine-year period.
Air Pollution, Housing Context and Maternal and Child Health
In this study, we focus on fine particulate matter and ozone exposure as potential environmental hazards. Fine particulate matter (PM2.5) consists of small particulates from both natural and anthropogenic sources that are small enough to be inhaled and become lodged deep in the lungs. It can cause aggravation of asthma or existing lung disease, heart attacks, decreased lung function, and cancers (Health and Environmental Effects of Particulate Matter (PM), 2022). Ozone is primarily a result of pollution from automobiles and industrial sources, especially in the summer months. Exposure to ozone can trigger airway inflammation and reduce lung function and can worsen bronchitis, emphysema, and asthma (Health Effects of Ozone Pollution, 2022).
Beyond the well-known cardiovascular and respiratory effects, prenatal exposure to PM2.5 and ozone can affect birth outcomes (Bekkar et al., 2020). Overall, it is estimated that exposure to air pollution during pregnancy results in a 10.8% increased risk of low birthweight and 11.5% increased risk of preterm birth. The mechanisms by which air pollution affects birth outcomes are hypothesized to be systemic inflammation, changes to maternal cardiac and respiratory function, placental inflammation, or direct fetal exposure to toxins, among other possibilities (Bekkar et al., 2020). Multiple pathways may operate simultaneously.
While air pollution has the same biological effect on a body regardless of sociodemographic characteristics, not all birthing people are equally vulnerable. Black birthing people and infants experience much greater levels of PM2.5 and ozone exposure than the rest of the population, followed by Asian and Latina moms and infants (Bekkar et al., 2020). Counties in the United States with the highest known ozone levels have significantly greater non-Hispanic Black populations than those with the lowest ozone levels (Miranda et al., 2011). Black Americans are more likely to live near roadways or industrial sites, to live in older, poorer quality homes, (Schulz et al., 2002) and to breathe air that is 38% more polluted than their white counterparts (Fleischman & Franklin, 2017). Disproportionate exposure to environmental pollution and poor housing stock contributes to higher rates of asthma, which is an independent risk factor for preterm birth, among Black women compared with their White peers. Pollution sources are often located in communities that also experience other forms of disadvantage, so controlling for potentially confounding neighborhood-level factors can help isolate the effects of air pollution. Finally, poor housing quality can be particularly dangerous for pregnant people. Studies have found that exposure to both poor-quality homes and crowding are associated with increased risk of low birthweight, small for gestational age, and birthweight percentile for gestational age (Harville & Rabito, 2018; Miranda et al., 2012). In communities with a limited supply of safe and affordable housing, housing cost-burden can force individuals to choose between paying rent, utilities, food, and medical care (Shaw, 2004), with accompanying stress also associated with adverse birth outcomes (Shapiro et al., 2013).
Methods
We estimate the relationships between environmental factors and low birthweight, gestational age and NICU admission using a series of pooled regression models with county and year fixed effects to control for time-invariant factors impacting birth outcomes. We construct a dataset using 2011–2019 birth records from thirteen Wisconsin counties combined with EPA data on air pollution, Census Data on housing context, and U.S. Department of Health and Human Services data on infant emergency healthcare access. The thirteen counties were chosen because they house EPA air pollution monitors that report consistent, high-quality data on ozone and PM2.5. These counties represent 50% of the state population, include both rural and urban counties, and represented 54% of the total births in Wisconsin in 2016. We use residential census tracts and counties from the birth records to append pollution and housing measures. We excluded multiple births (twins, triplets, etc.) because they experience higher levels of poor birth outcomes than single births, all else equal (Atoof et al., 2015; Kurdi et al., 2004). Total singleton births during this period were 298,316. We excluded births to birthing people under the age of 16 (672 births) and over the age of 44 (379 births) because birthing people outside of typical child-bearing years are more likely to have poor birth outcomes (Carolan, 2013). We additionally excluded observations with birthweights under 500 g (151 births) and other births which are unlikely to be true live births based on the combination of birthweight and weeks of gestation (1,279 births). Approximately 7% of observations had one or more missing data points. We use data from the birth certificates to perform multiple imputation by chained equations (MICE) in order to handle missing data in individual characteristics. Missing data in ozone and PM2.5 data was extrapolated using an average of the nearest non-missing neighbors before and after the missing observation. Our final sample includes 295,835 singleton births to birthing people between 16 and 44 years old that occurred between 2011 and 2019 in thirteen counties in Wisconsin. All analyses were completed using StataMP17.
Birth Outcomes
We model three birth outcomes as our dependent variables: weeks of gestation, standardized birthweight, and Neonatal Intensive Care Unit (NICU) admission.
Weeks of gestation is an obstetric estimate and preferrable to using a dichotomous preterm birth variable because gestational age in weeks is more strongly associated with infant health outcomes. Generally, outcomes are worse for infants born prior to 34 weeks, while late preterm birth (between 34 and 37 weeks) is more common. Additionally, early term births (37 or 38 weeks) tend to have higher rates of adverse outcomes than full term gestations (39 or 40 weeks) (Chawanpaiboon et al., 2019). Birth weights are normally distributed with variation by weeks of gestation, so we utilize the z-score methodology used by Oken et al (2003) to create a nearly continuous variable of birth weight for gestational age. Categorical divisions like “small for gestational age”, historically defined as those infants below the 10th percentile at each gestational age, may mask differences in risk for complications and later disease along the spectrum of birth weight (Oken et al., 2003). Oken’s continuous measure of birth weight relative to gestational age allows for a better understanding of the determinants of fetal development. NICU admission is a dichotomous variable determining whether an infant was admitted to the Neonatal Intensive Care Unit at the time of birth. Approximately half of the NICU admissions in our sample were infants who were either categorized as low birth weight or preterm. However, other conditions like Chronic Lung Disease (CLD) and jaundice can also be treated in the NICU. This measure accounts for