Log in
or
Register
Get new issue alerts
Secondary Logo
Journal Logo
Advanced Search
Articles and Issues
For Authors
Journal Info
ISEE
Previous Article
Next Article




META-ANALYSIS
Choices of morbidity outcomes and concentration–response functions for health risk assessment of long-term exposure to air pollution
Forastiere, Francescoa,b,*; Spadaro, Joseph V.c,d; Ancona, Carlae; Jovanovic Andersen, Zoranaf; Cozzi, Ilariae; Gumy, Sophiec; Loncar, Dejanc; Mudu, Pierpaolog; Medina, Sylviah; Perez Velasco, Romang; Walton, Heatherb,i; Zhang, Jiaweif; Krzyzanowski, Michalb
Author Information
Environmental Epidemiology 8(4):p e314, August 2024. | DOI: 10.1097/EE9.0000000000000314
OPEN
SDC
Metrics
Abstract
Background: 
Air pollution health risk assessment (HRA) has been typically conducted for all causes and cause-specific mortality based on concentration–response functions (CRFs) from meta-analyses that synthesize the evidence on air pollution health effects. There is a need for a similar systematic approach for HRA for morbidity outcomes, which have often been omitted from HRA of air pollution, thus underestimating the full air pollution burden. We aimed to compile from the existing systematic reviews and meta-analyses CRFs for the incidence of several diseases that could be applied in HRA. To achieve this goal, we have developed a comprehensive strategy for the appraisal of the systematic reviews and meta-analyses that examine the relationship between long-term exposure to particulate matter with an aerodynamic diameter smaller than 2.5 µm (PM2.5), nitrogen dioxide (NO2), or ozone (O3) and incidence of various diseases.
Methods: 
To establish the basis for our evaluation, we considered the causality determinations provided by the US Environmental Protection Agency Integrated Science Assessment for PM2.5, NO2, and O3. We developed a list of pollutant/outcome pairs based on these assessments and the evidence of a causal relationship between air pollutants and specific health outcomes. We conducted a comprehensive literature search using two databases and identified 75 relevant systematic reviews and meta-analyses for PM2.5 and NO2. We found no relevant reviews for long-term exposure to ozone. We evaluated the reliability of these studies using an adaptation of the AMSTAR 2 tool, which assesses various characteristics of the reviews, such as literature search, data extraction, statistical analysis, and bias evaluation. The tool’s adaptation focused on issues relevant to studies on the health effects of air pollution. Based on our assessment, we selected reviews that could be credible sources of CRF for HRA. We also assessed the confidence in the findings of the selected systematic reviews and meta-analyses as the sources of CRF for HRA. We developed specific criteria for the evaluation, considering factors such as the number of included studies, their geographical distribution, heterogeneity of study results, the statistical significance and precision of the pooled risk estimate in the meta-analysis, and consistency with more recent studies. Based on our assessment, we classified the outcomes into three lists: list A (a reliable quantification of health effects is possible in an HRA), list B+ (HRA is possible, but there is greater uncertainty around the reliability of the CRF compared to those included on list A), and list B− (HRA is not recommended because of the substantial uncertainty of the CRF).
Results: 
In our final evaluation, list A includes six CRFs for PM2.5 (asthma in children, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, ischemic heart disease events, stroke, hypertension, and lung cancer) and three outcomes for NO2 (asthma in children and in adults, and acute lower respiratory infections in children). Three additional outcomes (diabetes, dementia, and autism spectrum disorders) for PM2.5 were included in list B+. Recommended CRFs are related to the incidence (onset) of the diseases. The International Classification of Diseases, 10th revision codes, age ranges, and suggested concentration ranges are also specified to ensure consistency and applicability in an HRA. No specific suggestions were given for ozone because of the lack of relevant systematic reviews.
Conclusion: 
The suggestions formulated in this study, including CRFs selected from the available systematic reviews, can assist in conducting reliable HRAs and contribute to evidence-based decision-making in public health and environmental policy. Future research should continue to update and refine these suggestions as new evidence becomes available and methodologies evolve.
What this study adds:
This study determines reliable concentration–response functions (CRFs) for morbidity outcomes to be applied in health risk assessments (HRAs) of long-term exposure to air pollution. It offers a comprehensive and rigorous approach to selecting CRFs based on causality considerations, reliability appraisal of the systematic reviews and meta-analyses providing the CRFs, and confidence in the epidemiological evidence as the sources of the CRFs. The conclusions of the study contribute to the accuracy and reliability of HRAs, providing guidance for authorities and researchers in assessing the impact of air pollution on morbidity. This research fills a gap in the literature by integrating and systemizing the available evidence and facilitating informed decision-making in the public health and environmental policy arena.
Introduction
Long-term exposure to ambient air pollution has been convincingly linked to mortality. concentration–response functions (CRFs), mathematical relationships between air pollutant concentrations and mortality, have been proposed based on systematic reviews1,2 and complemented by more recent studies such as the large European ELAPSE (Effects of Low-Level Air Pollution: A Study in Europe) study.3 However, health risk assessment (HRA), including quantitative health impact assessment, traditionally oriented toward mortality impact, should be supplemented by evaluating the impact on morbidity to calculate the overall health burden of air pollution. Several morbidity outcomes have been linked to long-term exposure to air pollution, but a comprehensive, systematic, and recently updated evaluation of suitable CRFs is not available. In addition, it should be noted that a series of recent empirical studies suggest that air pollution, through its effects on morbidity, also has significant negative impacts on the economy through direct and indirect costs, including medical expenditures, labor productivity losses, and welfare costs.4
A review of epidemiological studies published before 2013 with recommendations concerning the assessment of the impacts of ambient air pollution on mortality and morbidity was formulated in the World Health Organization (WHO) HRAPIE (Health Risks of Air Pollution in Europe) project.5,6 The causality assessment of the pollutant/outcome associations in HRAPIE was provided by the “Review of EVIdence on Health Aspects of Air Pollution (REVIHAAP)” project.7 The HRAPIE report contained a list of CRFs for cost–benefit analyses in Europe, but they have been applied in various applications, including burden and impact analyses (burden provides a snapshot of the overall air pollution health effect at a location; impact analyses compare the burden of pollution across different policies). The recommendations from the HRAPIE report regarding the morbidity outcomes related to long-term exposure were few and included “prevalence of bronchitis in children aged 6–12 (or 6–18) years” and “incidence of chronic bronchitis in adults (age, 18+ years)” for particulate matter with an aerodynamic diameter smaller than 10 µm (PM10) and “prevalence of bronchitis symptoms in asthmatic children aged 5–14 years” for nitrogen dioxide (NO2). All these pollutant/morbidity pairs were placed in a category described as containing pollutant/outcome pairs for which there is significant uncertainty about the quality of the evidence used to quantify effects.
Since 2013, new evidence on the association between air pollutants and morbidity has been published in the scientific literature, and several official documents have proposed various choices of CRFs for HRA. In the United Kingdom, Public Health England published a comprehensive assessment of the burden of air pollution in 2018, accompanied by an extensive list of morbidity outcomes for HRA.8 In 2023, the UK Committee on the Medical Effects of Air Pollutants (COMEAP) provided recommendations for quantifying health effects associated with air pollutants, including morbidity.9 Recent statements from COMEAP on particulate matter with an aerodynamic diameter smaller than 2.5 µm (PM2.5) and mortality (long-term exposure),10 as well as on-air pollutants and hospital admissions,11 have been published, and an extensive review of the methodology has been produced.12 A report on morbidity effects funded by the Swedish Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) is also available.13 The recent impact assessment study14 to support the revision of the EU Ambient Air Quality Directives (AAQD) included several morbidity CRFs associated with long-term exposure to PM2.5 (such as stroke, nonfatal myocardial infarction, asthma in children, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease [COPD], type 2 diabetes, and lung cancer). Finally, the European Environmental Agency (EEA) has also considered morbidity effects in a recent report.15 All these studies produced or used CRFs that need to be integrated into a single set of associations following a systematic and coherent approach.
The current work aimed to compile, from the available systematic reviews and meta-analyses, the CRFs for the incidence of several diseases that could be applied in HRAs. To achieve this goal, we developed a comprehensive strategy for selecting suitable CRFs from recent systematic reviews. This strategy involves a methodical appraisal of the existing systematic reviews and meta-analyses that examine the relationship between long-term exposure to fine particulates (PM2.5), nitrogen dioxide (NO2), and ozone (O3) and various morbidity outcomes. Additionally, we formulated suggestions for applying these associations based on specific characteristics extracted from the studies that provided the CRFs. These suggestions aim to guide researchers and authorities in utilizing the appropriate CRFs for their HRA studies, which have further economic implications. This work is a part of a broader WHO project, “Estimation of Morbidity from Air Pollution and its Economic Costs” (EMAPEC), https://www.who.int/activities/estimating-the-morbidity-from-air-pollution-and-its-economic-costs.
Methods
Rationale
The epidemiological evidence indicates that the effects of long-term exposure to air pollution on mortality have a larger impact on public health than the effects of short-term exposure.16–18 The associations between air pollutants and mortality reported in cohort studies usually represent the effects of long-term exposure to pollutants (incidence and progression of a disease) and short-term exposure to increased concentrations (exacerbation of pre-existing medical conditions). In other words, long-term studies on mortality encompass cumulative long- and short-term exposure burdens. In morbidity studies focused on disease incidence, long-term exposure contributes to progressive health deterioration and, consequently, to the development of new illnesses over time. Furthermore, short-term exposure also results in the manifestation of acute health outcomes and contributes to complications among persons already afflicted by underlying medical conditions. In this work, we focused on the CRFs for the incidence of morbidity outcomes due to long-term exposure to ambient air pollution. Our approach was based on the following considerations.
(1) Only well-defined clinical conditions should be considered. Potential physiopathological markers of the effects, such as lung function, intima-media thickness, and cognitive decline, although important to understand the air pollution mechanism of action, should be excluded.
(2) The potential health outcomes should be supported by robust and persuasive evidence of a causal relationship with the pollutant of concern. Therefore, scientific findings should be well-founded and rely on human evidence, namely, the integration of epidemiological, toxicological and clinical studies, and mechanistic explanations. Meeting this requirement necessitates a convincing causality assessment, which requires a thorough multidisciplinary evaluation that only a few authoritative organizations can provide.
(3) The human evidence should be adequately quantified in well-characterized multiple observational studies conducted across different locations of the world. These studies should indicate a statistically significant association with a relatively narrow margin of uncertainty (high precision). Overall, any considerable influence of chance, bias, and confounding should be minimized.
The choice of the appropriate CRFs is based on a consensus among experts followed by a peer review process, as was the case for the WHO HRAPIE 2013 project.5 Further, a clear and transparent justification for the choices is needed. The selection is based on the available synthesis of the evidence from published systematic reviews and meta-analyses. First, the reliability of the systematic reviews and meta-analyses should be evaluated, as sometimes problems in methodological rigor have been reported.18 Considering that the most recent systematic reviews are able to capture the newest studies, we prioritized such reviews in our search for CRFs. Next, for those systematic reviews of adequate reliability, the confidence in the findings of the selected systematic reviews and meta-analyses should be assessed.
Principles and PECOS
In our review of systematic reviews, we have followed the published recommendations for conducting an umbrella review.19 It should be noted, however, that the scope of our search was not to evaluate the strength of the association from all the available evidence, as in the case of hazard identification, but rather to identify the most appropriate and reliable pooled effect estimates for quantitative risk assessment. We identified systematic reviews of studies on the association of morbidity due to selected clinical conditions (cardiovascular, respiratory, neurological,