We use cookies to distinguish you from other users and to provide you with a better experience on our websites. Close this message to accept cookies or find out how to manage your cookie settings. Learn more about our Privacy Notice...
[opens in a new tab]
What is Cambridge Open Engage?
How To Submit
Browse
About
News
[Opens In A New Tab]
Search ChemRxiv
Log In
Back to
Earth, Space, and Environmental Chemistry
Organic aerosol formation from 222 nm germicidal light: ozone-initiated vs. non-ozone pathways
28 June 2024, Version 1
Working Paper
Authors
Matthew Goss ,Jesse Kroll
Show author details
This content is a preprint and has not undergone peer review at the time of posting.
Download
Cite
Comment
Abstract
Germicidal ultraviolet lamps outputting 222 nm light (GUV222) have the potential to reduce the airborne spread of disease through effective inactivation of pathogens, while remaining safe for direct human exposure. However, recent studies have identified these lamps as a source of ozone and other secondary pollutants such as secondary organic aerosol (SOA), and the health effects of these pollutants must be balanced against the benefits of pathogen inactivation. While ozone reactions are likely to account for much of this secondary indoor air pollution, 222 nm light may initiate additional non-ozone chemical processes, including the formation of other oxidants and direct photolytic reactions, which are not as well understood. This work examines the impacts of GUV222 light on SOA formation and composition by comparing limonene oxidation under GUV222 and O3-only control conditions in a laboratory chamber. Differences between these experiments enable us to distinguish patterns in aerosol formation driven by ozone chemistry from those driven by other photolytic processes. These experiments also examine the influence of the addition of NO2 and nitrous acid (HONO), and investigate SOA formation in sampled outdoor air. SOA composition and yield vary only slightly with respect to GUV222 vs ozone-only conditions; NO2 and HONO photolysis do not appreciably affect the observed chemistry. In contrast, we observe consistent new particle formation under high-fluence 222 nm light (45 µW cm-2) that differs dramatically from ozone-only experiments. This observed new particle formation represents an additional reason to keep GUV222 fluence rates to the lowest effective levels.
Keywords
Germicidal ultraviolet lightOzoneSecondary organic aerosol222 nm
Supplementary materials
Title
Description
Actions
Supporting information for: "Organic aerosol formation from 222 nm germicidal light: ozone-initiated vs. non-ozone pathways"
The supplement includes a detailed description of experimental methods and analysis techniques, plots representing data from all experiments, results from a simple box modeling study, and results and discussion of the photolysis of HONO under GUV222 light.
Download
(3 MB)
Comments
Log in or register with ORCID to comment
Comments are not moderated before they are posted, but they can be removed by the site moderators if they are found to be in contravention of our Commenting Policy
[opens in a new tab]
- please read this policy before you post. Comments should be used for scholarly discussion of the content in question. You can find more information about how to use the commenting feature here
[opens in a new tab]
.
This site is protected by reCAPTCHA and the Google Privacy Policy
[opens in a new tab]
and Terms of Service
[opens in a new tab]
apply.
Version History
Jun 28, 2024 Version 1
Metrics
133
85
0
Views
Downloads
Citations
License
CC
BY
NC
ND
The content is available under CC BY NC ND 4.0
[opens in a new tab]
DOI
10.26434/chemrxiv-2024-j0vp9
D O I: 10.26434/chemrxiv-2024-j0vp9 [opens in a new tab]
Funding
Training Grant in Environmental Toxicology (MIT Center for Environmental Health Sciences)
MathWorks Engineering Fellowship Fund
Author’s competing interest statement
The author(s) have declared they have no conflict of interest with regard to this content
Ethics
The author(s) have declared ethics committee/IRB approval is not relevant to this content
Share
How To Submit
Browse
About Us
News
[Opens In A New Tab]
Technology Provided By
ISSN 2573-2293 (Online)
ChemRxiv Archive
Legal NoticesPrivacy PolicyAccessibilityContact and HelpPublic API
1.0.2737
Feedback