Loading [MathJax]/jax/output/HTML-CSS/config.js
Your privacy, your choice
We use essential cookies to make sure the site can function. We, and our 209 partners, also use optional cookies and similar technologies for advertising, personalisation of content, usage analysis, and social media.
By accepting optional cookies, you consent to allowing us and our partners to store and access personal data on your device, such as browsing behaviour and unique identifiers. Some third parties are outside of the European Economic Area, with varying standards of data protection. See our privacy policy for more information on the use of your personal data. Your consent choices apply to springer.com and applicable subdomains.
You can find further information, and change your preferences via 'Manage preferences'.
You can also change your preferences or withdraw consent at any time via 'Your privacy choices', found in the footer of every page.
We use cookies and similar technologies for the following purposes:
Store and/or access information on a device
Personalised advertising and content, advertising and content measurement, audience research and services development
Accept all cookies
Reject optional cookies
Manage preferences
Skip to main content
Advertisement
Log in
Find a journal
Publish with us
Track your research
Search
Cart
Home Environmental Health Article
Age and sex differences in the effects of short- and long-term exposure to air pollution on endothelial dysfunction
Research
Open access
Published: 08 July 2024
Volume 23, article number 63, (2024)
Cite this article
Download PDF
You have full access to this
open access
article
Environmental Health
Aims and scope
Submit manuscript
Haoyu Zhang, Jing Yang, Yinghua Zhang, Keling Xiao, Yang Wang, Jin Si, Yan Li, Lijie Sun, Jinghao Sun, Ming Yi, Xi Chu & Jing Li 
360 Accesses
Explore all metrics
Abstract
Background
The effects of air pollution on endothelial function remain unclear across populations. We aimed to use brachial artery flow-mediated dilatation (FMD) to identify demographic differences in the effects of air pollution exposure on endothelial dysfunction.
Methods
We measured FMD in 850 participants from October 2016 to January 2020. Location-specific concentrations of fine particulate matter < 2.5 μm aerodynamic diameter (PM2.5), inhalable particulate matter < 10 μm aerodynamic diameter (PM10), sulfur dioxide (SO2), nitrogen dioxide (NO2), carbon monoxide (CO), and ozone (O3) measured by fixed ambient air monitoring stations were collected for short- and long-term exposure assessment. Multiple linear regression models and restricted cubic splines were used to assess the associations before and after stratification by age and sex.
Results
This study eventually included 828 participants [551 (66.5%) younger than 65 years and 553 (66.8%) men]. Each 10 µg/m3 increase in 7-day exposure to PM2.5 and PM10 was significantly linearly associated with a 0.07% (β = -0.07, 95% CI: -0.13 to -0.004) and 0.05% (β = -0.05, 95% CI: -0.10 to -0.004) decrease in FMD in the fully adjusted model. After full adjustment, long-term exposure to all air pollutants was significantly associated with impaired FMD. Each 10 µg/m3 increase in long-term exposure to PM2.5 and PM10 was significantly associated with a -0.18% (95% CI: -0.34 to -0.03) and − 0.23% (95% CI: -0.40 to -0.06) change in FMD, respectively. After stratification, the associations of lower FMD with long-term exposure to PM2.5, PM10, SO2, NO2, and CO significantly persisted in men and participants younger than 65 years instead of women or older participants. For short-term exposure, we observed differences consistent with long-term exposure and a stronger effect of 7-day exposure to SO2 in men due to a significant interaction effect.
Conclusion
Short- and long-term exposure to different air pollutants are strongly associated with decreased endothelial function, and susceptibility to air pollution varies significantly with age and sex.
View this article's peer review reports
Similar content being viewed by others
Long-term exposure to ambient air pollution and measures of central hemodynamics and arterial stiffness among multiethnic Chicago residents
Article Open access
07 May 2024
Air pollution exposure and vascular endothelial function: a systematic review and meta-analysis
Article 27 January 2023
Long-term exposure to particulate air pollution and brachial artery flow-mediated dilation in the Old Order Amish
Article Open access
14 May 2020
Background
Age and sex-related disparities in the primary and secondary prevention of cardiovascular disease (CVD) are a continually pressing public issue. With a rapid and sustained increase in the ageing population, the rising CVD mortality rate among older patients presents a great challenge to the disease burden in China [1, 2]. Besides, it is suggested that women with prior CVD are less likely to take guideline-directed medications, and those with a high risk of CVD are less likely to have well-controlled blood pressure, low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-C), or body mass index than men [3]. Since ageing and sex are irreversible, it is essential to improve public health policies and protect the aforementioned populations from other CVD risk factors.
As a global concern and an ever-increasing burden on national health systems [4, 5], air pollution exposure has been uncovered to increase CVD morbidity and mortality in healthy populations [6, 7], and to aggravate the prognoses of those with pre-existing CVD [8, 9]. The vascular endothelium is a biologically active tissue that plays a central role in the process of atherosclerosis, from early to advanced stages, by regulating vascular tone, modulating vascular inflammation, thrombosis, and vascular injury mainly via radical nitric oxide [10]. Endothelial dysfunction is therefore an integrated index of risk factor burden and a marker of subclinical atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease (ASCVD). Brachial flow-mediated dilation (FMD) is a widely used noninvasive test of peripheral endothelial function. Impaired FMD has been demonstrated to predict adverse cardiovascular events and worse cardiovascular outcomes, showing great value in primary and secondary prevention strategies for CVD [11, 12]. However, epidemiological studies on the association between air pollution and endothelial dysfunction provide conflicting evidence and focus almost exclusively on the effects of lower and narrower ranges of particulate matter on healthy populations [13,14,15,16]. Consequently, differences in susceptibility by age and sex have not been adequately elucidated in the current studies on endothelial dysfunction.
In this study, we hypothesized that exposure to air pollution would be consistently and positively associated with persistent endothelial dysfunction, and more severe effects were expected to be observed in female and older participants. We explored the impacts of six air pollutants across different time windows in a more heavily polluted area and their differences across populations to test the hypothesis. We aimed to provide new insights into the prevention of CVD by assessing endothelial dysfunction to identify vulnerable populations under air pollution exposure.
Patients and methods
Study population
This study was carried out at Xuanwu Hospital, Capital Medical University from October 2016 to January 2020. The study participants were enrolled from: (1) patients with a known history of CVD who came for routine visits to the Cardiology Outpatient Department; and (2) subjects who attended regular physical examinations at the Health Management Department. Those who volunteered for additional cardiovascular risk assessments and endothelial function measurements at the Health Management Department were enrolled in this study consecutively. End-stage liver or kidney disease, incomplete primary data, and residence outside Xicheng District, Beijing were the main exclusion criteria. The study was conducted following the Declaration of Helsinki and approved by the Ethics Committee of Xuanwu Hospital, Capital Medical University. Written informed consent was received from all participants enrolled in the study.
Age, sex, body mass index (BMI), smoking status (never smoker, former smoker, and current smoker), physical examination (resting heart rate, systolic and diastolic blood pressure), laboratory tests (triglycerides, high-density lipoprotein cholesterol, LDL-C, serum uric acid, and serum creatinine), treatment medication, comorbidities (CVD, hypertension, diabetes, and other medical diagnosis), and residential address were obtained through available medical records and standardized questionnaires by trained interviewers. The CVD history of all participants was diagnosed based on coronary angiography or coronary computed tomography or a history of myocardial infarction; other diagnoses were based on self-reported, previous medical history, and available physical examination medical records. The Prediction for ASCVD Risk in China (China-PAR) model, one of the extra cardiovascular risk assessments, was used to predict the 10-year ASCVD risk to characterize the population of non-ASCVD participants in this study (e.g., < 5.0% as low risk, 5.0-9.9% as moderate risk, and ≥ 10.0% as high risk) [17].
Measures of endothelial dysfunction
Endothelial dysfunction was measured by FMD according to the standardized procedures [18, 19]. FMD was detected by the same ultrasound researcher, and the brachial artery was scanned with a color Doppler ultrasound instrument. All participants fasted (> 6 h), avoided exercise (> 12 h), and abstained from vitamin C, caffeine, polyphenols, supplements, alcohol, and smoking (> 12 h). Participants were placed in the supine position and the brachial artery of the right arm was selected for examination after 15 min of rest. The sphygmomanometer cuff was tied 1–2 cm distal to the antecubital fossa. The baseline artery diameter (BAD) was scanned and examined longitudinally above the antecubital fossa for more than 30 s before the cuff inflation. The cuff pressure was then 50 mmHg higher than systolic pressure (1 mmHg = 0.133 kPa) and inflated for 5 min to occlude blood flow. The pressure in the cuff was monitored within 5 min to ensure that the pressure fluctuation was less than 10 mmHg. After cuff deflation, the diameter was measured continuously for 3 min to obtain the maximum artery diameter (MAD). All diameter measurements were obtained at the end diastole.
FMD (%) was computed as: (MAD-BAD/BAD) ×100.
Exposure assessment
Air pollutant data were obtained from the National Air Pollution Monitoring System, including fine particulate matter with aerodynamic diameter < 2.5 μm (PM2.5), inhalable particulate matter with aerodynamic diameter < 10 μm (PM10), sulfur dioxide (SO2), nitrogen dioxide (NO2), carbon monoxide (CO), and ozone (O3). Xicheng District is a relatively small administrative area in the center of Beijing, with a width of about 7.1 km from east to west and a length of about 11.2 km from north to south, a total area of 50.70 km2 and two fixed air quality monitoring stations. Daily (24-hour) average concentrations of PM2.5, PM10, NO2, SO2, CO, and 8-hour maximum ozone levels were the average values measured by the two fixed ambient air quality monitoring stations in Xicheng District, Beijing. The above pollutant concentrations were used directly in the exposure assessments for all participants, considering the proximity of the addresses to the monitoring stations, as all participants lived in Xicheng District. Daily meteorological data on temperature (℃) were also obtained from the China Meteorological Administration.
We used the moving average 7- and 14-day exposures before the date of FMD measurements to estimate the short-term exposure effects and the moving average 12-month exposures before the date of FMD measurements to estimate the long-term exposure effects. Corresponding time windows (7- and 14-day) were also assigned to temperature.
Statistical analysis
Baseline characteristics of participants were described as mean ± standard deviation (SD) for normally distributed continuous variables, median (25th, 75th percentiles) for variables with skewed distributions, and numbers (percentages) for categorical variables. The Shapiro–Wilk normality test was performed to test the normality of the data. Continuous variables were compared using the Mann-Whitney’s U test and proportions for categorical variables were compared using the chi-square test or the Fisher exact test. Spearman correlation analysis was used to calculate associations between different pollutant concentrations at different exposure times.
First, we grouped air pollution concentration quartiles (Quartiles 1 to 4) and performed crude analyses to assess the association between air pollutants and FMD for different exposure time windows. Multiple linear regression models were then performed to examine the associations further and calculate the partial regression coefficient (β) and its 95% confidence interval (95% CI). Baseline variables that were considered clinically relevant or with P values of less than 0.10 in univariate analysis were entered into the models while avoiding multicollinearity and over-adjustment. For short-term exposure, Model 1 adjusted for age group (< 65 years and ≥ 65 years), sex, BMI, smoking status, temperature, and season (warm: April to September; cold: October to March) as the covariates. “Season” was added to control for possible seasonal trends in short-term exposure effects. For long-term exposure, Model 1 adjusted for the same covariates except temperature and season. Model 2 additionally adjusted for CVD, hypertension, diabetes mellitus, resting heart rate, and LDL-C. We used the results from Model 2 as the final results. The median concentrations of each quartile group of air pollutants were entered into the models as continuous variables to test for linear trends. Restricted cubic splines with three knots were used to verify and visualize the statistically significant associations identified by regression analysis. To determine whether the associations between air pollutants