Product & Services
Subscribe
Submit a paper
Browse
Rankings
Blog↗
Contact
Create account
Sign in
  This is a preprint article, it offers immediate access but has not been peer reviewed.
Download This Paper
Open PDF in Browser
Add Paper to My Library
Share:
Variations of Ground Surface Albedo and its Influence on the Photolysis Rates of No2 in a Typical Urbanized Area of Shanghai
34 Pages Posted: 4 Jul 2024
Guangli Xiu
East China University of Science and Technology (ECUST)
Yusen DUAN
affiliation not provided to SSRN
Qingyan Fu
Shanghai Academy of Environmental Sciences
Kun Zhang
Shanghai University
Qian Wang
affiliation not provided to SSRN
Linhong Xiao
affiliation not provided to SSRN
Yu Xiao
Shanghai Environmental Monitoring Center
Juntao HUO
Shanghai Environmental Monitoring Center
Fan Yang
Pudong New district Environmental Monitoring Station
Chen Meng
affiliation not provided to SSRN
Abstract
Photolysis reactions are commonly regarded as the initial reaction of atmospheric chemistry. The photolysis of NO2 is a crucial reaction contributing to ozone pollution within the planetary boundary layer.The rate of NO2 photolysis depends on factors such as solar actinic flux, the absorption cross-section of NO2, and  the quantum yield of the resulting photodissociation products. Ground surface albedo has the potential to amplify the overall J(NO2) value and enhance photochemical reactions. Research conducted at the PUDONG supersite, situated in a downtown areas surrounded by urban structures, revealed an average ground surface albedo of J(NO2) to be 0.146±0.028. This albedo was observed to increase with higher solar zenith angles, surpassing 0.20 when the solar zenith angle exceeded 45°, values notably higher than the parameter utilized in the CAMx model(0.08).The reflection of solar UV radiation by the ground surface can stimulate ozone formation by boosting the photolysis of NO2. Modeling results from F0AM during a typical ozone episode indicated that the average increments in daily maximum ozone concentration were 7.21%,14.52% and 21.91% for albedos of 0.10, 0.15 and 0.20, respectively, compared to albedo of 0.05. WRF-CAMx simulations demonstrated a significant increase in daily maximum ozone concentration with the expansion of urban ground surfaces from 1990 to 2020, highlighting the substantial impact of rising ground surface albedo on exacerbating ozone pollution.
Keywords: Photolysis frequency of NO2, Ground surface albedo, Solar zenith angle(SZA), Ozone, Urban land cover, Impervious
Suggested Citation:
Xiu, Guangli and DUAN, Yusen and Fu, Qingyan and Zhang, Kun and Wang, Qian and Xiao, Linhong and Xiao, Yu and HUO, Juntao and Yang, Fan and Meng, Chen, Variations of Ground Surface Albedo and its Influence on the Photolysis Rates of No2 in a Typical Urbanized Area of Shanghai. Available at SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4885573 or http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.4885573










Download This Paper
Open PDF in Browser
109 References
H Akimoto
Spectra and Photolytic Reactions of Atmospheric Molecules
Atmospheric Reaction Chemistry , p. 71 - 164 Posted: 2016
B A Albrecht
Aerosols, cloud microphysics, and fractional cloudiness
Science , volume 245 , issue 4923 , p. 1227 - 1230 Posted: 1989
S T Andersen , L J Carpenter , C Reed , J D Lee , R Chance , T Sherwen , A R Vaughan , J Stewart , P M Edwards , W J Bloss , R Sommariva , L R Crilley , G J Nott , L Neves , K Read , D E Heard , P W Seakins , L K Whalley , G A Boustead , K W Fomba
Extensive field evidence for the release of HONO from the photolysis of nitrate aerosols
Science Advances , volume 9 , issue 3 , p. 1 - 9 Posted: 2023
R Atkinson , D L Baulch , R A Cox , J N Crowley , R F Hampson , R G Hynes , M E Jenkin , M J Rossi , J Troe
Evaluated kinetic and photochemical data for atmospheric chemistry: Volume I -gas phase reactions of O-x, HOx, NOx and SOx species
ATMOSPHERIC CHEMISTRY AND PHYSICS , volume 4 , p. 1461 - 1738 Posted: 2004
Load more
0 Citations
Do you have a job opening that you would like to promote on SSRN?
Place Job Opening
Paper statistics
DOWNLOADS
3
ABSTRACT VIEWS
17
109 References
PlumX Metrics
Related eJournals
Environmental Pollution & Prevention eJournal
Follow
Feedback
Submit a Paper
Section 508 Text Only Pages
SSRN Quick Links
SSRN Solutions
Research Paper Series
Conference Papers
Partners in Publishing
Jobs & Announcements
Special Topic Hubs
SSRN Rankings
Top Papers
Top Authors
Top Organizations
About SSRN
Network Directors
Announcements
Contact us
FAQs
Copyright Terms and Conditions Privacy Policy
All content on this site: Copyright © 2023 Elsevier Inc., its licensors, and contributors. All rights are reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. For all open access content, the Creative Commons licensing terms apply.
We use cookies to help provide and enhance our service and tailor content.
To learn more, visit Cookie Settings.
We use cookies that are necessary to make our site work. We may also use additional cookies to analyze, improve, and personalize our content and your digital experience. For more information, see ourCookie Policy
Cookie Settings
Accept all cookies