Journals & Books
Help
Search
My account
Sign in
Access through your institution
Purchase PDF
Article preview
Abstract
Introduction
Section snippets
References (74)
Cited by (86)
Journal of Stored Products Research
Volume 64, Part B
, October 2015, Pages 139-145
Review
The use of ozone gas for the control of insects and micro-organisms in stored products
Author links open overlay panel
Ali A. Isikber a
,
Christos G. Athanassiou b
Show more
Add to Mendeley
Share
Cite
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jspr.2014.06.006
Get rights and content
Abstract
In this review paper, we analyze the potential of using ozone as an alternative pest control technology for use in stored products, and we also illustrate data on the efficacy of ozone against micro-organisms and its effect on qualitative characteristics and properties of the treated commodities. Ozone application is currently attracting attention, particularly due to the fact that a) there are no residues on the product and b) there is no need for aeration to remove the gas. Novel industrial applications and improvements in ozone technology together with new regulatory actions worldwide have emerged in recent years, making its use in the food industry easier and applicable in a wide range of cases. This review paper presents available literature on ozone in relation to its use against pests and other organisms, but also to its different application techniques and for large scale viability.
Introduction
Control of insect pests in stored products is becoming increasingly difficult, partially due to the development of pesticide resistance in some species, but also due to the cryptic behavior of most major stored product species (Subramanyam and Hagstrum, 1996). Furthermore, the number of pesticides available for treatment of stored products is decreasing due to environmental and safety concerns and the consumers' demand for residue-free food (Phillips and Throne, 2010). With limited control options and the increased potential for resistance to insecticides (Zettler and Cuperusi, 1990, Benhalima et al., 2004, Lorini et al., 2007, Opit et al., 2012), additional methods are needed for management of insects in stored products. One potential candidate is ozone, which has proven effective against a wide range of storage insect pests and applicable in various stored commodities (Erdman, 1980, Strait, 1998, Kells et al., 2001, Leesch, 2003, Zhanggui et al., 2003, Isikber and Oztekin, 2009).
Ozone (O3) is highly reactive and a strong oxidizing agent, which is classified as “GRAS” (Generally Recognized As Safe) by the United States Environmental Protection Agency (USEPA). Throughout the world, ozone has been used to purify drinking water, kill bacteria, sanitize food, deodorize, and decrease aflatoxin contamination (Prudente and King, 2002, Sopher et al., 2002, Inan et al., 2007, Tiwari et al., 2010, White et al., 2010). Ozone is able to penetrate large masses of grain, is highly unstable and decomposes rapidly to oxygen without leaving residues (Kells et al., 2001, Mason et al., 1997 Pimentel et al., 2009, McDonough et al., 2011b). These attributes make ozone an attractive candidate for controlling insects and fungi in stored products (Mason et al., 1997, Kells et al., 2001). Ozone in its gaseous form kills insects in various commodities and this activity has been thoroughly evaluated by many researchers under laboratory and field conditions, with various application techniques (Erdman, 1980, Mason et al., 1997, Kells et al., 2001, Athanassiou et al., 2008, Pimentel et al., 2009, McDonough et al., 2010, McDonough et al., 2011a, McDonough et al., 2011b). This paper reviews the efficacy of ozone for the storage and preservation of stored commodities, the effect of ozonation on product quality and the current status of ozone application in stored product protection strategies.
Section snippets
Characteristics of gaseous ozone
Ozone, an allotropic form of oxygen, is a triatomic molecule (O3) that in its pure, concentrated, gaseous form has a pale blue color and a pungent characteristic odor (Weavers and Wickramanayake, 2001, Kim et al., 1999). In nature, small amounts of ozone (0.05 mg/L) are formed in the stratosphere, at 15–35 km altitude, by the reaction of solar ultraviolet radiation (<240 nm) with molecular oxygen (Horváth et al., 1985, Kim et al., 2003). The troposphere (<15 km altitude) contains approximately
Toxicity and susceptibility of insects to gaseous ozone
Several studies have established that ozone treatments can kill stored product insects, including the maize weevil, Sitophilus zeamais (Motschulsky) (Coleoptera: Curculionidae), the rice weevil, Sitophilus oryzae (L.), the red flour beetle, Tribolium castaneum (Herbst) (Coleoptera: Tenebrionidae), the confused flour beetle Tribolium confusum Jacquelin du Val, the lesser grain borer Rhyzopertha dominica (F.) (Coleoptera: Bostrychidae), the Indianmeal moth Plodia interpunctella (Hübner)
Flow characteristics and penetration of gaseous ozone through stored bulk grain
Initial movement of ozone through the grain was impeded by a phenomenon described as the ozone demand of the medium (Kim et al., 1999). Ozone movement through the grain layer is restricted by the highly reactive nature of ozone (Mendez et al., 2003). The surfaces of many materials act as catalysts for ozone decay. Thus, the rate of decay of ozone is generally dependent on the surface characteristics of the materials through which it comes into contact and temperature. The decay rate of ozone in
Effect of ozone against fungi, bacteria and mycotoxins in durable stored products
The fungicidal effect as well as the effect of ozone against aflatoxins has been well established in early studies (Dollear et al., 1968, Dwarakanath et al., 1968, Kim et al., 1999). This effect is restricted only on the external part (surface) of the grain kernels, since ozone does not seem to penetrate within the kernel (Strait, 1998, Kells et al., 2001). For stored grains, Kells et al. (2001) found that 50 ppm of ozone for 3 d notably reduced the contamination of stored maize by the fungus
Effect of ozone treatments on quality parameters of stored products
Ozone treatments may affect various quality parameters of the durable commodities. The effects of ozone treatment on the quality and physiology of the commodities mainly depends on ozone doses, exposure time and environmental conditions such as treatment medium and temperature. There are suggested applications of ozone in the food industry such as food surface hygiene, sanitation of food plant equipment, reuse of waste water, and lowering biological oxygen demand (BOD) and chemical oxygen
Conclusions
Ozone is an effective alternative to traditional insecticides, as a viable bio-fumigant against a range of insect pests, micro-organisms and mycotoxins. However, discrepancies regarding the efficacy of ozone are often found in the bibliography and further research is still needed, to clarify and develop the inferences for its wider use, including the cost of its application. These differences could be attributed to a great variability in the conditions of the application, such as the feeding
Acknowledgments
This review was partially funded by General Secretary for Research and Technology, Greece, Scientific and Technological Research Council of Turkey and Research Foundation of Kahramanmaras Sutcu Imam University grants EPAN 4.3.1.6e, NSRF (ESPA) 10 TUR/1-2-2, TUBITAK 109O802 and KSU 2008/4-24M.
References (74)
H. Benhalima et al.
Phosphine resistance in stored-product insects collected from various grain storage facilities in Morocco
J. Stored Prod. Res.
(2004)
R. Chen et al.
Effect of ozone on aflatoxins detoxification and nutritional quality of peanuts
Food Chem.
(2014)
H. Choi et al.
Transport characteristics of gas phase ozone in unsaturated porous media for in-situ chemical oxidation
J. Contam. Hydrol.
(2002)
C. Desvignes et al.
Changes in common wheat grain milling behavior and tissue mechanical properties following ozone treatment
J. Cereal Sci.
(2008)
L.S. Hansen et al.
Effect of gaseous ozone for control of stored product pests at low and high temperature
J. Stored Prod. Res.
(2013)
J.A. Hardin et al.
Ozone fumigation of stored grain; closed-loop recirculation and the rate of ozone consumption
J. Stored Prod. Res.
(2010)
W.W. Hoback et al.
Insects in hypoxia
J. Insect Physiol.
(2001)
J. Hoigné et al.
Rate constants of reactions of ozone with organic and inorganic compounds in water—II
Water Res.
(1983)
F. Inan et al.
Use of ozone in detoxification of aflatoxin B1 in red pepper
J. Stored Prod. Res.
(2007)
A.A. Isikber et al.
Comparison of susceptibility of two stored product insects, Ephestia kuehniella Zeller and Tribolium confusum du Val to gaseous ozone
J. Stored Prod. Res.
(2009)
View more references
Cited by (86)
Efficacy of entomopathogenic fungi against three major stored insect pests, Rhyzopertha dominica, Sitophilus zeamais and Trogoderma granarium
2023, Journal of Stored Products Research
Show abstract
Remediation of pesticide residues using ozone: A comprehensive overview
2023, Science of the Total Environment
Show abstract
Electrolyzed water and gaseous ozone application for the control of microbiological and insect contamination in dried lemon balm: Hygienic and quality aspects
2022, Food Control
Show abstract
Ozone as an alternative fumigant for controlling Callosobruchus maculatus (F.) (Coleoptera: Chrysomelidae) in cowpea beans
2022, Journal of Stored Products Research
Show abstract
Study on the Modified Ventilation Network on the Ventilation Effect and Ozone Migration Characteristics in Grain Pile
2024, Buildings
Disinfection of Medical Solid Waste through the Application Ozone Technology: Feasibility and Effectiveness Study
2024, Iranian Journal of Public Health
View all citing articles on Scopus
View full text
Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
Part of special issue
Integrated Protection of Stored Products: sustainability in practice
Edited by Christos Athanassiou
Other articles from this issue
Overview of present and past and pest-associated risks in stored food and feed products: European perspective
October 2015
V. Stejskal, …, Z. Kucerova
Purdue Improved Crop Storage (PICS) bags for safe storage of groundnuts
October 2015
H. Sudini, …, L.L. Murdock
Desiccation resistance and water balance in populations of the maize weevil
October 2015
Nelsa Maria P. Guedes, …, Raul Narciso C. Guedes
View more articles
Recommended articles
SCoT-marker analysis of Oryzaephilus surinamensis L. (Coleoptera: Silvanidae) and stored date kernels of (L.) fumigated with ozone and phosphine gases
Journal of Asia-Pacific Entomology, Volume 24, Issue 3, 2021, pp. 843-849
Nilly A.H. Abdelfattah, …, Sameer H. Qari
Assessment of quantitative and qualitative losses of stored grains due to insect infestation in Ethiopia
Journal of Stored Products Research, Volume 89, 2020, Article 101689
Marid Taddese, …, Tadele Tefera
Ozone toxicity to Sitophilus zeamais (Coleoptera: Curculionidae) populations under selection pressure from ozone
Journal of Stored Products Research, Volume 65, 2016, pp. 1-5
A.H. Sousa, …, R.N.C. Guedes
Show 3 more articles
Article Metrics
Citations
Citation Indexes:
83
Captures
Readers:
146
Social Media
Shares, Likes & Comments:
1
View details
About ScienceDirect
Remote access
Shopping cart
Advertise
Contact and support
Terms and conditions
Privacy policy
Cookies are used by this site.
Cookie Settings
All content on this site: Copyright © 2024 Elsevier B.V., its licensors, and contributors. All rights are reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. For all open access content, the Creative Commons licensing terms apply.
We use cookies that are necessary to make our site work. We may also use additional cookies to analyze, improve, and personalize our content and your digital experience. For more information, see ourCookie Policy
Cookie Settings
Accept all cookies