Your Privacy
We use cookies to make sure that our website works properly, as well as some 'optional' cookies to personalise content and advertising, provide social media features and analyse how people use our site. By accepting some or all optional cookies you give consent to the processing of your personal data, including transfer to third parties, some in countries outside of the European Economic Area that do not offer the same data protection standards as the country where you live. You can decide which optional cookies to accept by clicking on 'Manage preferences', where you can also find more information about how your personal data is processed. Further information can be found in our privacy policy.
Accept all cookies
Manage preferences
Browse
Tools & Services
About
Sign In
Submit a Preprint
Research Article
Variations of cosmic and geophysical processes and possible impact on the development of the COVID-19 pandemic
Tsimafei Schlender, Aliaksandr Krasouski, Siarhei Zenchanka, Veronika Zhuchkevich, and 3 more
This is a preprint; it has not been peer reviewed by a journal.
https://doi.org/10.21203/rs.3.rs-4577844/v1
This work is licensed under a CC BY 4.0 License
Abstract
The concept of planetary boundaries defines nine areas mostly affected on Earth health. One of these areas connected with the ozone layer state is responsible for ultraviolet (UV) flow reaching Earth’s surface. There is a close relationship between solar activity and geomagnetic indices and changes in polar ozone under the influence of solar radiation. This work discusses the relationship between the geomagnetic index Ap, the total ozone content as secondary indicators of solar activity, and the incidence of COVID around the world for the period from January 1, 2020, to May 1, 2021, when there were the first and second waves of the incidence of the virus. Obtained comparative analysis of geomagnetic index Ap and TO in the last solar cycle reveals that geophysical variations can foster favorable conditions for pandemics. The 25th solar cycle's peak in 2024 aligns with the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic, consistent with previous research. Increased GCR and UV radiation during solar cycle minima further influence Earth's conditions. The pandemic coincided with heightened solar activity after the 24th cycle's minimum and the secular maximum of GCR. Geomagnetic disturbances and reduced TO levels in both hemispheres exacerbated the COVID-19 waves, accelerating case development.
Ozone
COVID-19
Planetary boundaries
Geophysical processes
Solar cycles
Galactic Cosmic Rays
Figures
1 Introduction
2 Methods
3 Results
4 Discussion
5 Conclusion
Declarations
References
Additional Declarations
Cite
Share
PDF
Status:
Posted
Version 1
posted 15 Jul, 2024
You are reading this latest preprint version
Citations
See more
Engagement
18 views
Comments
0
Research Square lets you share your work early, gain feedback from the community, and start making changes to your manuscript prior to peer review in a journal.
As a division of Research Square Company, we’re committed to making research communication faster, fairer, and more useful. We do this by developing innovative software and high quality services for the global research community. Our growing team is made up of researchers and industry professionals working together to solve the most critical problems facing scientific publishing.
Also discoverable on
PLATFORM
About
Our Team
In Review
Editorial Policies
Advisory Board
Contact Us
Help Center
RESOURCES
Author Services
Research Quality Evaluation
Blog
Accessibility
API Access
RSS feed
Cookies Settings
COMPANY
About Us
Careers
Partner With Us
Responsibility
Press
© Research Square 2024 | ISSN 2693-5015 (online)
Privacy Policy
Terms of Service
Do Not Sell My Personal Information
By clicking “Accept All Cookies”, you agree to the storing of cookies on your device to enhance site navigation, analyze site usage, and assist in our marketing efforts. Privacy Policy
Cookies Settings Accept All Cookies