Menu
Buletin Poltanesa
Sign in
EN
Journal article // Buletin Poltanesa
Air Pollution Assessment of Samarinda Using the C4.5 Algorithm
Anton Prafanto, Indah Fitri Astuti, Ummi Salamah, Fahrul Agus, Awang Harsa Kridalaksana + 1 more author
Download PDF
Cite this
Share
Abstract
The degradation of air quality in numerous Indonesian cities is attributed to the swift proliferation of motorised vehicles, rapid population growth, and inadequate green spaces. Samarinda, the capital of East Kalimantan province, is plagued by high levels of pollution resulting from heavy vehicle exhaust emissions. The provision of accurate air quality information can mitigate respiratory issues. However, the public does not have access to air quality information due to the high cost of air quality measuring devices. Therefore, an Internet of Things (IoT)-based air pollution monitoring system using ESP32 is needed to provide interactive and real-time information. This study tested the C4.5 algorithm to classify air quality data based on six measurement parameters: PM10, PM2.5, CO, O3, and NO2. PM10 and PM2.5 particles are the primary pollutants that significantly impact human health. The World Health Organization (WHO) has set an annual quality standard value of 20μg/m3 for PM10 and 10μg/m3 for PM2.5. Carbon Monoxide (CO) can reduce the blood's ability to carry oxygen, which can affect the function of vital organs such as the heart and brain. Ozone (O3) on the Earth's surface is a harmful pollutant that can damage the lungs and other respiratory systems. Nitrogen dioxide (NO2) can cause lung inflammation and lower immunity to infections, such as influenza and pneumonia. This study uses the C4.5 algorithm to classify air quality data based on these parameters, which are important for determining air quality. The results show that air quality is divided into two types: good and moderate, with different proportions each day. The C4.5 algorithm achieved a success rate of 99.5074% and a failure rate of 0.4926% when processing air quality data. It was effective in classifying air quality and processing data. An Internet of Things (IoT)-based air pollution monitoring system using ESP32 is needed to provide interactive and real-time information to the public.
Full text
Buletin Poltanesa Vol. 24 No. 2 (December 2023
) 235-241 p-ISSN 2721-5350 e-ISSN 2721-5369 
https://doi.org/10.51967/tanesa.v24i2.2946 
©   2023 Politeknik Pertanian Negeri Samarinda 
 This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attributio
n 4.0 License CC 
BY
-SA 
CC
–
  235 
–
Air Pollution Assessment of Samarinda Using 
the C4.5 Algorithm 
Anton Prafanto* 
Informatic
, Mulawarman University
, 
Samarinda 
antonprafanto@fkti.unmul.ac.id 
*
Corresponding author 
Fahrul Agus 
Informatic, Mulawarman University, 
Samarinda 
fahrulagus@unmul.ac.id 
Indah Fitri Astuti 
Informatic, Mulawarman University, 
Samarinda 
indahfitriastuti@unmul.ac.id 
Awang Harsa Kridalaksana 
Informatic, Mulawarman University, 
Samarinda 
awanghk@unmul.ac.id 
Ummi Salamah 
Informatic, Mulawarman University, 
Samarinda 
ummi.syarofhana@gmail.com 
Vina Zahrotun Kamila 
Information System Department, 
Mulawarman University, Samarinda 
vinakamila@ft.unmul.ac.id 
Abstract
—
The  degradation  of  air  quality  in  numerous 
Indonesian cities is attributed to the swift proliferat
ion of 
motorised   vehicles,   rapid   population   growth,   and 
inadequate  green  spaces.  Samarinda,  the  capital  of  East
Kalimantan  province,  is  plagued  by  high  levels  of 
pollution resulting from heavy vehicle exhaust emiss
ions. 
The  provision  of  accurate  air  quality  information  c
an 
mitigate respiratory issues. However, the public does not
have access to air quality information due to the h
igh cost 
of air quality measuring devices. Therefore, an Inter
net of 
Things (IoT)-based air pollution monitoring system u
sing 
ESP32  is  needed  to  provide  interactive  and  real-time
information.  This  study  tested  the  C4.5  algorithm  to
classify  air  quality  data  based  on  six  measurement 
parameters: PM10, PM2.5, CO, O3, and NO2. PM10 and 
PM2.5   particles   are   the   primary   pollutants   that 
significantly  impact  human  health.  The  World  Health 
Organization  (WHO)  has  set  an  annual  quality  standard 
value  of  20μg/m3  for  PM10  and  10μg/m3  for  PM2.5. 
Carbon Monoxide (CO) can reduce the blood's ability t
o 
carry  oxygen,  which  can  affect  the  function  of  vital
organs  such  as  the  heart  and  brain.  Ozone  (O3)  on  the 
Earth's surface is a harmful pollutant that can dam
age the 
lungs  and  other  respiratory  systems.  Nitrogen  dioxide
(NO2) can cause lung inflammation and lower immunity 
to  infections,  such  as  influenza  and  pneumonia.  This
study uses the C4.5 algorithm to classify air quality
 data 
based  on  these  parameters,  which  are  important  for 
determining air quality. The results show that air qu
ality 
is  divided  into  two  types:  good  and  moderate,  with 
different  proportions  each  day.  The  C4.5  algorithm 
achieved a success rate of 99.5074% and a failure rat
e of 
0.4926%   when   processing   air   quality   data.   It   was 
effective  in  classifying  air  quality  and  processing 
data. 
An   Internet   of   Things   (IoT)-based   air   pollution 
monitoring  system  using  ESP32  is  needed  to  provide 
interactive and real-time information to the public
. 
Keywords
—
ESP32, Air quality, C4.5 Algorithm, Internet 
of Things, Classifying air quality. 
I.
I
NTRODUCTION
Air  pollution  occurs  when  substances,  energy,  and 
other  components  enter  the  air  as  a  result  of  human 
activities, causing air quality to drop to an unhea
lthy level 
that  can  harm  human  health  (Decree  of  the  Indonesian 
Minister 
of 
Health 
Number 
1407/MENKES/SK/XI/2002).  Clean  air  quality  must  be 
prioritised,  as  low  air  quality  can  directly  impact  t
he 
health  of  living  organisms  on  the  Earth,  particular
ly 
humans  (Rahmawati  &  Khairina,  2021).  Some  of  the 
health  consequences  resulting  from  exposure  to  air 
pollution  are  headaches,  dizziness,  nausea,  irritatio
n  of 
the   nose,   throat,   eyes   and   skin,   acute   respiratory 
infections  (ARI),  asthma,  and  the  deadliest  disease, 
pneumonia (Sari & Mayasari, 2020). 
The  high  level  of  human  activity  and  population 
density in urban areas has resulted in significantly 
higher 
levels   of   air   pollutants   compared   to   other   areas 
(Rahmawati  &  Khairina,  2021).  The  degradation  of  air 
quality in multiple cities in the Indonesian region p
ersists 
in   its   escalation   (Greenstone   &   Fan,   2019).   This 
phenomenon  has  multiple  causes.  One  of  them  is  the 
swift  progress  of  motorised  transportation,  which  is 
directly  linked  to  the  increase  in  population,  but 
not 
correlated  with  the  expansion  of  green  open  spaces  an
d 
the  conservation  of  green  zones,  particularly  in  urba
n 
regions. 
Samarinda,   the   capital   city   of   East   Kalimantan 
province in Indonesia, is the largest city on the isla
nd of 
Kalimantan  with  a  population  of  858,080  residents, 
consisting   of   443,379   males   and   414,701   females 
(Central  Bureau  of  Statistics,  2019).  The  city  spans
  an 
area  of  718  km²,  possessing  hilly  terrain  with  altitu
des 
ranging from 10 to 200 metres above sea level. Exce
ssive 
amounts  of  exhaust  emissions  from  motorised  vehicle
s 
contribute  to  the  high  levels  of  pollution  experienc
ed  in 
the city. Every year, there has been a noticeable in
crease 
in  the  use  of  motorised  vehicles  in  Samarinda  City,  a
s 
stated  by  the  Central  Bureau  of  Statistics  (BPS)  of  E
ast 
Kalimantan Province (Hidayat & Noor, 2020)
.  
🤓
LOAD NEXT PAGE
More from this journal
Sistem Informasi Penjadwalan Petugas Ibadah dan Kehadiran Jemaat Sektor 3 di Gereja Hebron Protestan Samarinda
Open Access Dec 1, 2019
Veronaldo Yoga Saputra, Yulianto Yulianto, Erina Hertianti
Revealing Research Trends: A Bibliometric Review of Publications on Transformational Leadership
Open Access
Eko Yulianto, Yusuf Iskandar
Generating Digital Literacy Website: Upgrading the Understanding of Digital Literacy at SMA Yuppentek 1 Tangerang
Open Access
Arin Fithriana, Anggun Puspitasari, Samsinar Samsinar
🧐  Browse all from this journal
Metrics
0 views
0 downloads
Table of contents
Title & authors
Abstract
Full text
Powered by Neliti
About Buletin Poltanesa
About Neliti
Browse
OAI-PMH API
Terms
Privacy