Loading [MathJax]/jax/output/HTML-CSS/config.js
Your privacy, your choice
We use essential cookies to make sure the site can function. We, and our 209 partners, also use optional cookies and similar technologies for advertising, personalisation of content, usage analysis, and social media.
By accepting optional cookies, you consent to allowing us and our partners to store and access personal data on your device, such as browsing behaviour and unique identifiers. Some third parties are outside of the European Economic Area, with varying standards of data protection. See our privacy policy for more information on the use of your personal data. Your consent choices apply to springer.com and applicable subdomains.
You can find further information, and change your preferences via 'Manage preferences'.
You can also change your preferences or withdraw consent at any time via 'Your privacy choices', found in the footer of every page.
We use cookies and similar technologies for the following purposes:
Store and/or access information on a device
Personalised advertising and content, advertising and content measurement, audience research and services development
Accept all cookies
Reject optional cookies
Manage preferences
Skip to main content
Log in
Find a journal
Publish with us
Track your research
Search
Cart
Home Journal of Food Measurement and Characterization Article
In vitro and in vivo antimicrobial activity of the fumigant, ethyl formate, against bacteria and fungi of date fruits in postharvest phase
Original Paper
Open access
Published: 08 June 2024
(2024)
Cite this article
Download PDF
You have full access to this
open access
article
Journal of Food Measurement and Characterization
Aims and scope
Submit manuscript
Mahmoud M. Abo-El-Saad, Mohamed E. I. Badawy
, Mohamed S. Shawir, Yasser H. Hegazi & Youssef M. M. Mohammed 
605 Accesses
Explore all metrics
Abstract
The search is on for safer alternatives to fumigants like methyl bromide and phosphine, which harm the ozone layer and pose other risks. Ethyl formate is a promising candidate due to its potential antimicrobial and insecticidal action in stored products like date fruits. The susceptibility of date fruits to microbial spoilage is significantly influenced by factors such as moisture content, storage practices, and environmental conditions. In the present study, the in vitro antimicrobial effect of ethyl formate against three microbial species, namely Aspergillus niger F4, Mucor circinelloides YMM22, and Pseudomonas aeruginosa B1 was tested under laboratory conditions. In addition, two common date fruit varieties, semi-dry El-Wady I and the dry Frehi, were fumigated with ethyl formate alone in a laboratory-scale prototype and with a mixture of ethyl formate and CO2 at a semi-industrial scale prototype. Both varieties had an initial moisture content of around 13.40 and 12.48% for El-Wady I and Frehi, respectively. The fumigation was conducted using the optimal concentration of 70 mg/L air for 24 h incubation period. Fumigation with ethyl formate alone or in combination with CO2 significantly reduced the number of viable bacteria and fungi (CFU/g), but the potential for a combined effect with CO2 was not investigated. The percentages of reduction in the fungal count were 78.18 and 90.76% for Frehi and El-Wady I varieties, respectively in a semi-industrial scale prototype. Moreover, the percentages of reduction in the bacterial count were 53.31 and 65.20%, respectively for Frehi and El-Wady I varieties. Ethyl formate showed promise as a natural alternative to control microbial contamination of stored date fruits. Further research suggests that increasing fumigation duration or concentration could provide comprehensive control of microbial pathogens at all stages of development.
Similar content being viewed by others
Biological Control of Postharvest Spoilage in Fresh Mandarins (Citrus Reticulata Blanco) Fruits Using Bacteria During Storage
Article 13 December 2018
Novel Prosopis juliflora leaf ethanolic extract as natural antimicrobial agent against food spoiling microorganisms
Article Open access
12 April 2021
Natural antimicrobials for beet leaves preservation: in vitro and in vivo determination of effectiveness
Article 12 July 2018
Introduction
Date fruits provide essential growth factors such as many minerals, vitamins, sugars, and amino acids that are necessary for human and animal nutrition [1, 2]. Fruits possess specific features, such as high sugar content, moisture availability, and varying acidity, that readily nurture diverse microorganisms, resulting in their proliferation and subsequent spoilage [3,4,5]. Microbial attack, which encompasses contamination by bacteria, yeasts, and molds, poses a significant threat to date fruits, causing substantial damage and impacting both quantity and quality [5, 6]. Certain mold species, such as Fusarium, Aspergillus, and Penicillium, are known to be associated with the production of toxic chemicals called mycotoxins, including fumonisin, aflatoxin, and ochratoxin [5, 7]. It has been common practice for the control of these pests to use fumigants like phosphine and methyl bromide [8]. There are, however, some pests that become resistant to these fumigants [9].
Therefore, the search for alternative fumigants to conventional hazardous chemicals (such as methyl bromide and phosphine) has included studies using ethyl formate as a fumigant [10,11,12]. Unlike conventional chemicals that get trapped in products, low molecular weight of ethyl formate allows it to break down easily, minimizing residue concerns [13, 14]. Among agricultural products, ethyl formate gives them their unique taste and smell. It is generally considered safe for consumption at the levels typically found in food. Regulatory and scientific authorities, such as the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) and European Food Safety Authority (EFSA) have established acceptable daily intake (ADI) limits [15,16,17]. Ethyl formate has been used as a post-harvest treatment disinfectant to treat dried fruits, and its effectiveness has been confirmed on major pests found in dried fruits [18, 19]. Many fruits naturally produce ethyl formate as volatile compounds in trace amounts that have antimicrobial properties [14, 20]. Ethyl formate has proven effective against a wide range of stored-product pests infesting dried fruits, including insects, mites, and even some types of mold. This makes it a valuable tool for protecting dried fruits from spoilage and ensuring their quality [21]. Some studies have revealed the antimicrobial properties of ethyl formate as well as its insecticidal effect [17, 22]. However, its high volatility, flammability, and susceptibility to degradation pose challenges for practical application. In addition, it is desirable to obtain data on its residues under different conditions.
The current study aimed to test the in vitro antimicrobial effect of ethyl formate at different concentrations against three microbial species, namely Aspergillus niger F4, Mucor circinelloides YMM22, and Pseudomonas aeruginosa B1 under laboratory conditions. In addition, the promising concentration of ethyl formate was also evaluated in vivo on two common date fruits (Phoenix dactylifera L.) including semi-dry El-Wady I from El-Wady El-Gadeed region (El-Wady El-Gadeed Governorate, Egypt) and dry variety Frehi from Siwa Oasis (Matrouh Governorate, Egypt) in laboratory-scale and pilot-scale prototypes against total microbial loads. The residues of ethyl formate in fumigated date fruits under pilot-scale prototype were also determined by gas chromatography-flam ionization detector (GC-FID) for prediction of environmental impact. In terms of postharvest and storage conditions of protected date fruits, our findings reveal the importance of ethyl formate fumigation for improving environmental sustainability.
Materials and methods
Chemicals and microbiological media
Ethyl formate (97%) and dimethyl sulphoxide (DMSO) were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich Chemical Co. (St. Louis, MO, USA). Methanol and ammonium nitrate were obtained from El-Gomhoria for Pharmaceutical and Chemicals Co. (Alexandria, Egypt). Chloramphenicol (99%) was purchased from Pharco Pharmaceuticals Inc. (Alexandria, Egypt). Culture media like potato dextrose agar (PDA), nutrient agar (NA), nutrient broth (NB), and potato dextrose broth (PDB) were sourced from Oxoid Ltd (Basingstoke, Hampshire, UK). All other chemicals were obtained locally from El-Gomhoria for Pharmaceutical and Chemicals Co. (Alexandria, Egypt) and utilized directly, without further purification.
Preparation of microbial inoculants
Fungal strains Aspergillus niger F4 (GenBank accession number MW811390.1) and Mucor circinelloides YMM22 (GenBank accession number OQ067101.1) were grown on PDA plates and incubated at 28 °C for seven days. Spore suspensions were prepared in Tween 80 (0.05%, v/v) and adjusted to a concentration of 1.8 × 104 spore/mL using a hemocytometer [23]. A culture of Pseudomonas aeruginosa B1 (GenBank accession number MW811391.1) was grown on NA plates for 48 h at 28 °C. The bacteria were then harvested and suspended in NB medium with 0.05% Tween 80. The suspension was adjusted to a concentration of 1 × 105 colony-forming units per milliliter (CFU/mL) using the viable plate count method [24].
In vitro antimicrobial efficacy of ethyl formate
In vitro antifungal activity of ethyl formate against fungal spores
Fungal spore’s suspension (1 × 105 CFU/mL) was prepared using tween 80 (0.05%, v/v). The center of the PDA plates was inoculated with 100 μL of the fungal suspension. Ethyl formate (0–10 mg/L) was placed in a sterile filter paper disc ((1 cm2) attached to the lid of the plate. The plates were then tightly closed with parafilm and incubated at 28 °C in the inverted position [25, 26]. A control group included inoculated spores in the same condition but not fumigated. Conidia germination was assessed microscopically at 400 × magnification, after 48 h of the treatment. In addition, the plates were further incubated for 6 days, and the diameter of their growth zones was measured. Growth inhibition was then calculated as the percentage reduction in radial growth compared to a control group. A linear regression analysis was used to determine the EC50, which is the concentration of the inhibitory agent that reduces fungal growth by half (EC50) [27].
In vitro antifungal activity of ethyl formate against mycelial growth
The centers of the PDA plates were inoculated by a fungal disc (0.8 cm) of the tested fungus. Ethyl formate (0–10 mg/L) was placed on a filter paper disc (1 cm2) attached to the lid of the plate and the plates were sealed with parafilm [25]. A control group included inoculated plates in the same condition but not fumigated. Next, the plates were maintained at 28 °C. Finally, after 6 days of incubation, linear colony growth was measured and inhibition (%) was calculated relative to the control. In addition, the EC50 value was calculated by a linear regression method [27].
In vitro antibacterial activity of ethyl formate
The centers of the NA plates were inoculated by the tested bacterium P. aeruginosa B1. Different concentrations of ethyl formate (0–10 mg/L) were placed on filter paper discs (1 cm2) attached to the lid of the plate and the plates were sealed with parafilm [25, 28]. The parallel controls were maintained with NA plates inoculated by P. aeruginosa B1 without ethyl formate. Next, the plates were maintained at 28 °C. Finally, after 48 h of incubation, linear colony growth was measured and inhibition (%) was calculated relative to the control. In addition, the antibacterial activity of ethyl formate was evaluated using NB medium. Experiments were conducted in 100 mL Erlenmeyer flasks containing 20 mL of nutrient broth, inoculated with 100 μL of a bacterial suspension (1 × 105 CFU/mL), and treated with ethyl formate at various concentrations (0.1–2 mg/L) [29]. The flasks were then immediately rubberized and maintained at 28 °C and 150 rpm for 48 h. Finally, the bacterial growth (OD600nm) was measured spectrophotometrically and the inhibition (%) was calculated relative to the control. In addition, the minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) was calculated.
In vivo efficacy of promising ethyl formate concentration against microbial pests
In vivo efficacy on dates-borne microbial load in a laboratory-scale prototype
A preliminary experiment in a laboratory-scale prototype was studied to determine the antimicrobial activity of the ethyl formate alone by fumigation technique. Two common date fruits (Phoenix dactylifera L.) varieties were obtained including semi-dry El-Wady I from El-Wady El-Gadeed region (El-Wady El-Gadeed Governorate, Egypt) and dry variety Frehi from Siwa Oasis (Matrouh Governorate, Egypt). Date fruits (five fruits) were placed in sterilized Petri plates. Plates were transferred to 1 L glass jars (10 replicates) for fumigation as a simple prototype. Ethyl formate (70 mg/L air) was applied to the filter paper affixed to the bottom surface of the rubber band screw caps of the jar, then screwed on tightly and left for 24 h of exposure time. The control group (10 replicates) was not exposed to ethyl formate under the same conditions. After fumigation, the samples were obtained and each date sample (1 g of dry or semi-dry) was cut and serially diluted under aseptic conditions with sterile distilled water. Then, after sample homogenization, a 0.1 mL aliquot was used as an inoculum for the microbiological analysis [30]. Fungi were enumerated by pour plate technique from dates using PDA plates supplemented with chloramphenicol (100 mg/L) to suppress bacterial growth. Three replicate plates were prepared for each dilution of the date sample. 0.1 mL aliquots of each