Product & Services
Subscribe
Submit a paper
Browse
Rankings
Blog↗
Contact
Create account
Sign in
  This is a preprint article, it offers immediate access but has not been peer reviewed.
Download This Paper
Open PDF in Browser
Add Paper to My Library
Share:
Degradation of Uv328 by Ozone/Peroxymonosulfate System: Performance and Mechanisms
26 Pages Posted: 29 Jun 2024
Mengyu Wang
Shanghai University of Electric Power
Can He
affiliation not provided to SSRN
Zhongguo Zhang
Beijing New-High Technology Academy
Chenfei Zhang
affiliation not provided to SSRN
Huiqin Xiong
affiliation not provided to SSRN
Xin Xie
affiliation not provided to SSRN
Cheng Zhu
Beijing Jiaotong University
Yuanmin Xu
Beijing Jiaotong University
Jiuyi Li
Beijing Jiaotong University
Abstract
2-(2H-benzotriazol-2-yl)-4,6-di-tert-pentylphenol (UV328) is an emerging persistent organic pollutant ubiquitously found in environmental matrices. Though some advanced oxidation processes have been tested to degrade UV328 in waste streams, the degradation mechanisms are largely unknown. In this study, the degradation of UV328 by ozone (O3) and peroxymonosulfate (PMS) was systemically investigated. At neutral pH, 97.0% UV328 was removed in 5 min with 6.4 mg/min O3 and 2 mM PMS, and the degradation rate was positively correlated with the concentration of oxidants. Hydroxyl radical (•OH), sulfate radical (SO4•-) and singlet oxygen (1O2) participated in the degradation of UV328, in which 1O2 played a key role. Based on the identified transformation intermediates and density functional theory simulations, three degradation pathways of dehydrogenation, cycloaddition and hydroxylation were proposed. •OH and SO4•- radicals could attack UV328 through hydrogen atom abstraction channel. 1O2-mediated cycloaddition reaction is favorable, and •OH could react with UV328 via radical adduct formation pathway. Toxicity assessment indicated that O3/PMS treatment mitigated the ecological risks of UV328.
Keywords: UV328, O3/PMS, reactive species, degradation mechanism, toxicity assessment
Suggested Citation:
Wang, Mengyu and He, Can and Zhang, Zhongguo and Zhang, Chenfei and Xiong, Huiqin and Xie, Xin and Zhu, Cheng and Xu, Yuanmin and Li, Jiuyi, Degradation of Uv328 by Ozone/Peroxymonosulfate System: Performance and Mechanisms. Available at SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4880395 or http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.4880395















Download This Paper
Open PDF in Browser
54 References
C Adamo , V Barone
Toward reliable density functional methods without adjustable parameters: The PBE0 model
J. Chem. Phys , volume 110 , issue 13 , p. 6158 - 6170 Posted: 1999
M Alameddine , A Siraki , L Tonoyan , M Gamal El-Din
Treatment of a mixture of pharmaceuticals, herbicides and perfluorinated compounds by powdered activated carbon and ozone: Synergy, catalysis and insights into nonfree OH contingent mechanisms
Sci. Total Environ , volume 777 Posted: 2021
G P Anipsitakis , D D Dionysiou
Radical generation by the interaction of transition metals with common oxidants
Environ. Sci. Technol , volume 38 , p. 3705 - 3712 Posted: 2004
C Apel , J Tang , R Ebinghaus
Environmental occurrence and distribution of organic UV stabilizers and UV filters in the sediment of Chinese Bohai and Yellow Seas
Environ. Pollut , volume 235 , p. 85 - 94 Posted: 2018
Load more
0 Citations
Do you have a job opening that you would like to promote on SSRN?
Place Job Opening
Paper statistics
DOWNLOADS
1
ABSTRACT VIEWS
17
54 References
PlumX Metrics
Related eJournals
Environmental Pollution & Prevention eJournal
Follow
Feedback
Submit a Paper
Section 508 Text Only Pages
SSRN Quick Links
SSRN Solutions
Research Paper Series
Conference Papers
Partners in Publishing
Jobs & Announcements
Special Topic Hubs
SSRN Rankings
Top Papers
Top Authors
Top Organizations
About SSRN
Network Directors
Announcements
Contact us
FAQs
Copyright Terms and Conditions Privacy Policy
All content on this site: Copyright © 2023 Elsevier Inc., its licensors, and contributors. All rights are reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. For all open access content, the Creative Commons licensing terms apply.
We use cookies to help provide and enhance our service and tailor content.
To learn more, visit Cookie Settings.
We use cookies that are necessary to make our site work. We may also use additional cookies to analyze, improve, and personalize our content and your digital experience. For more information, see ourCookie Policy
Cookie Settings
Accept all cookies