Product & Services
Subscribe
Submit a paper
Browse
Rankings
Blog↗
Contact
Create account
Sign in
  This is a preprint article, it offers immediate access but has not been peer reviewed.
Download This Paper
Open PDF in Browser
Add Paper to My Library
Share:
Remote Sensing of Air Pollutants in China to Study the Effects of Emission Reduction Policies on Air Quality
33 Pages Posted: 4 Jul 2024
Gerrit de Leeuw
Royal Netherlands Meteorological Institute
Ronald van der A
Royal Netherlands Meteorological Institute
Jianhui Bai
affiliation not provided to SSRN
Mirjam den Hoed
Royal Netherlands Meteorological Institute
Jieying Ding
Royal Netherlands Meteorological Institute
Jianping Guo
Chinese Academy of Meteorological Sciences - State Key Laboratory of Severe Weather
Zhengqiang Li
affiliation not provided to SSRN
Ying Zhang
affiliation not provided to SSRN
Cheng Fan
affiliation not provided to SSRN
Kai Qin
affiliation not provided to SSRN
Selviga Sinnathamby
affiliation not provided to SSRN
Sarah Safieddine
affiliation not provided to SSRN
Costas A. Varotsos
National and Kapodistrian University of Athens
Yong Xue
affiliation not provided to SSRN
Yan Yin
Nanjing University of Information Science and Technology
Qianqian Zhang
affiliation not provided to SSRN
Xin Zhang
affiliation not provided to SSRN
Xingying Zhang
China Meteorological Administration
Xiumei Zhang
affiliation not provided to SSRN
Abstract
Air Quality (AQ) is determined by the concentrations of aerosols and trace gases. Aerosol concentration is measured by the mass concentration of particles smaller than 2.5 µm (PM2.5) or 10 µm (PM10), while trace gases include ozone (O3), nitrogen dioxide (NO2), sulfur dioxide (SO2), and carbon monoxide (CO). Ammonia (NH3) and (biogenic) volatile organic compounds ((B)VOCs) also play an important role in atmospheric chemistry affecting the concentrations of trace gases and ultimately AQ. This study focuses on various aspects of AQ in China, utilizing remote sensing data from satellite and ground-based sensors to obtain information on PM emissions and concentrations and AQ-relevant trace gases. This research was conducted within the framework of the ESA/NRSCC MOST collaboration project Dragon 5, as part of the EMPAC (Exploitation of satellite remote sensing to enhance our comprehension of the Mechanisms and Processes influencing Air quality in China) project. It summarizes findings on four main topics: (1) Retrieval of trace gas concentrations and aerosol products from satellite data, validation using ground-based reference data, and interpretation of results in terms of AQ effects, such as the conversion of column-integrated properties to near-surface concentrations; (2) Determination of trace gases emissions relevant to AQ, using satellite data and models; (3) Analysis of time series data on trace gases and aerosols to assess the impact of emission reduction policies on AQ improvement ; (4) Research contributing to a deeper understanding of mechanisms and processes affecting atmospheric composition about AQ.
Keywords: Earth Observation, Air Quality, Emissions, Trends
Suggested Citation:
de Leeuw, Gerrit and van der A, Ronald and Bai, Jianhui and den Hoed, Mirjam and Ding, Jieying and Guo, Jianping and Li, Zhengqiang and Zhang, Ying and Fan, Cheng and Qin, Kai and Sinnathamby, Selviga and Safieddine, Sarah and Varotsos, Costas A. and Xue, Yong and Yin, Yan and Zhang, Qianqian and Zhang, Xin and Zhang, Xingying and Zhang, Xiumei, Remote Sensing of Air Pollutants in China to Study the Effects of Emission Reduction Policies on Air Quality. Available at SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4885688 or http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.4885688



















Download This Paper
Open PDF in Browser
87 References
Aan De Brugh , J M J Henzing , J S Schaap , M Morgan , W T Van Heerwaarden , C C Weijers , E P Coe , H Krol , M C
Modelling the partitioning of ammonium nitrate in the convective boundary layer
Atmos. Chem. Phys , volume 12 , p. 3005 - 3023 Posted: 2012
Aeronet
Aerosol Robotic Network Posted: 2024-06-30
J H Bai
The relationships between BVOC emission fluxes and their influencing factors in a subtropical Pinus forest
Ecology and Environmental Sciences , volume 30 , issue 5 , p. 889 - 897 Posted: 2021
J H Bai
2021b. O 3 Concentration and its relation with BVOC emissions in a subtropical plantation
Atmosphere , volume 12
Load more
0 Citations
Do you have a job opening that you would like to promote on SSRN?
Place Job Opening
Paper statistics
DOWNLOADS
10
ABSTRACT VIEWS
29
87 References
PlumX Metrics
Related eJournals
Atmospheric Sciences eJournal
Follow
Feedback
Submit a Paper
Section 508 Text Only Pages
SSRN Quick Links
SSRN Solutions
Research Paper Series
Conference Papers
Partners in Publishing
Jobs & Announcements
Special Topic Hubs
SSRN Rankings
Top Papers
Top Authors
Top Organizations
About SSRN
Network Directors
Announcements
Contact us
FAQs
Copyright Terms and Conditions Privacy Policy
All content on this site: Copyright © 2023 Elsevier Inc., its licensors, and contributors. All rights are reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. For all open access content, the Creative Commons licensing terms apply.
We use cookies to help provide and enhance our service and tailor content.
To learn more, visit Cookie Settings.
We use cookies that are necessary to make our site work. We may also use additional cookies to analyze, improve, and personalize our content and your digital experience. For more information, see ourCookie Policy
Cookie Settings
Accept all cookies