Loading [MathJax]/jax/output/HTML-CSS/config.js
Your privacy, your choice
We use essential cookies to make sure the site can function. We also use optional cookies for advertising, personalisation of content, usage analysis, and social media.
By accepting optional cookies, you consent to the processing of your personal data - including transfers to third parties. Some third parties are outside of the European Economic Area, with varying standards of data protection.
See our privacy policy for more information on the use of your personal data.
Manage preferences for further information and to change your choices.
Accept all cookies
Reject optional cookies
Skip to main content
Advertisement
Log in
Find a journal
Publish with us
Track your research
Search
Cart
Home Role of Science and Technology for Sustainable Future Chapter
Sustainable Development in India and Its Future Prospects
Chapter
First Online: 01 July 2024
pp 15–22
Cite this chapter
Role of Science and Technology for Sustainable Future
Pramila Oliya, Neeta Raj Sharma & Rattan Deep Singh 
31 Accesses
Abstract
The importance of science and technology (S&T) in understanding the roots of sustainability concerns and developing effective solutions is becoming more widely acknowledged. The CFCs used for food preservation, air-conditioning, and ozone depletion were all made possible by scientific and technological progress. In addition to raising the ozone alarm through study and monitoring, they also provided us the alternative technologies that have allowed us to keep fulfilling the demands that CFCs have served in a less harmful manner to the environment. The rise in agricultural yields and improved distribution networks that have kept much of the world from starvation are largely attributable to scientific and technological advancements, but they have come at the expense of severe environmental damage.
In the twenty-first century, fostering sustainable transitions will need for a wide range of measures, not the least of which is better science and technology development and application.
This is a preview of subscription content, log in via an institution to check access.
References
Gallopín G (ed) (2002) Report on the Latin American and Caribbean regional workshop on science and technology for sustainable development. ISTS, Santiago
Google Scholar
  Global Change (2002) Sustainable development: the role of international science. IHDP, Bonn
Google Scholar
  ICSU (2002a) Report of the scientific and technological community to the world summit on sustainable development (WSSD). ICSU series on science for sustainable development, no. 1. ICSU, Paris. http://www.icsu.org/Library/WSSD-Rep/vol1.pdf
Google Scholar
  ICSU (2002b) Science and technology as a foundation for sustainable development. ICSU, Paris
Google Scholar
  IGBP (2001) Global change and the Earth system: a planet under pressure. IGBP science series, no. 4. IGBP, Stockholm. http://www.igbp.kva.se//uploads/ESO_IGBP4.pdf
Google Scholar
  IGBP (2002) The Amsterdam Declaration on Global Change—challenges of a changing Earth. http://www.sciconf.igbp.kva.se/fr.html
InterAcademy Panel (2000) Transition to sustainability in the 21st century: the contribution of science and technology. IAP, Tokyo. https://www.interacademies.org/statement/iap-statement-transition-sustainability
Google Scholar
  ISTS (2002a) European science for sustainability: achievements and challenges. ISTS, Bonn
Google Scholar
  ISTS (2002b) Science and technology for sustainability: North American challenges and lessons. ISTS, Ottawa
Google Scholar
  ISTS (2002c) Mobilizing science and technology for sustainable development. ISTS, Cambridge
Google Scholar
  Kates RW et al (2001) Sustainability science. Science 292:641–642
Article
  CAS
  PubMed
  Google Scholar
  Lebel L (2002) Sustainability science: knowledge, technology and institutions for sustainability transitions in Asia. ISTS, Chiang Mai
Google Scholar
  Mabogunje A (2001) African perspectives on sustainability science. ISTS, Abuja
Google Scholar
  Download references
Author information
Authors and Affiliations
Department of International Outreach, Indus University, Ahmedabad, Gujarat, India
Pramila Oliya
School of Bioengineering and Biosciences, Lovely Professional University, Phagwara, Punjab, India
Neeta Raj Sharma & Rattan Deep Singh
Corresponding author
Correspondence to Neeta Raj Sharma .
Editor information
Editors and Affiliations
Department of Biotechnology, Punjab University, Chandigarh, Punjab, India
Ranbir Chander Sobti
Rights and permissions
Reprints and permissions
Copyright information
© 2024 The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd.
About this chapter
Cite this chapter
Oliya, P., Sharma, N.R., Singh, R.D. (2024). Sustainable Development in India and Its Future Prospects. In: Sobti, R.C. (eds) Role of Science and Technology for Sustainable Future. Springer, Singapore. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-97-0710-2_2
Download citation
.RIS.ENW.BIB
DOI
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-97-0710-2_2
Published
01 July 2024
Publisher Name
Springer, Singapore
Print ISBN
978-981-97-0709-6
Online ISBN
978-981-97-0710-2
eBook Packages
Biomedical and Life Sciences
Biomedical and Life Sciences (R0)
Publish with us
Policies and ethics
Access this chapter
Log in via an institution
Chapter
EUR 29.95
Price includes VAT (Italy)
Available as PDF
Read on any device
Instant download
Own it forever
Buy Chapter
eBook
EUR 128.39
Hardcover Book
EUR 166.39
Tax calculation will be finalised at checkout
Purchases are for personal use only
Institutional subscriptions
Sections
References
Abstract
References
Author information
Editor information
Rights and permissions
Copyright information
About this chapter
Publish with us
Discover content
Journals A-Z
Books A-Z
Publish with us
Publish your research
Open access publishing
Products and services
Our products
Librarians
Societies
Partners and advertisers
Our imprints
Springer
Nature Portfolio
BMC
Palgrave Macmillan
Apress
Your privacy choices/Manage cookies Your US state privacy rights Accessibility statement Terms and conditions Privacy policy Help and support Cancel contracts here
146.241.125.157
Not affiliated
© 2024 Springer Nature