Skip to main content
This Journal
Search
SEARCH
ISSUE IN PROGRESS
ARCHIVES
ABOUT THIS JOURNAL
JOURNALS
OPEN ACCESS
Research
26 June 2024
Association of Gaseous Ambient Air Pollution and Dementia-Related Neuroimaging Markers in the ARIC Cohort, Comparing Exposure Estimation Methods and Confounding by Study Site
Authors: Katie M. Lynch, Erin E. Bennett, Qi Ying, Eun Sug Park, Xiaohui Xu, Richard L. Smith, James D. Stewart, Duanping Liao, Joel D. Kaufman, Eric A. Whitsel, and Melinda C. Power https://orcid.org/0000-0001-9099-7964AUTHORS INFO & AFFILIATIONS
Publication: Environmental Health Perspectives
Volume 132, Issue 6
CID: 067010
https://doi.org/10.1289/EHP13906
249
PDF
Information & Authors
Metrics & Citations
References
Media
Tables
Share
Abstract
Background:
Evidence linking gaseous air pollution to late-life brain health is mixed.
Objective:
We explored associations between exposure to gaseous pollutants and brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) markers among Atherosclerosis Risk in Communities (ARIC) Study participants, with attention to the influence of exposure estimation method and confounding by site.
Methods:
We considered data from 1,665 eligible ARIC participants recruited from four US sites in the period 1987–1989 with valid brain MRI data from Visit 5 (2011–2013). We estimated 10-y (2001–2010) mean carbon monoxide (CO), nitrogen dioxide (NO2), nitrogen oxides (NOx), and 8- and 24-h ozone (O3) concentrations at participant addresses, using multiple exposure estimation methods. We estimated site-specific associations between pollutant exposures and brain MRI outcomes (total and regional volumes; presence of microhemorrhages, infarcts, lacunes, and severe white matter hyperintensities), using adjusted linear and logistic regression models. We compared meta-analytically combined site-specific associations to analyses that did not account for site.
Results:
Within-site exposure distributions varied across exposure estimation methods. Meta-analytic associations were generally not statistically significant regardless of exposure, outcome, or exposure estimation method; point estimates often suggested associations between higher NO2 and NOx and smaller temporal lobe, deep gray, hippocampal, frontal lobe, and Alzheimer disease signature region of interest volumes and between higher CO and smaller temporal and frontal lobe volumes. Analyses that did not account for study site more often yielded significant associations and sometimes different direction of associations.
Discussion:
Patterns of local variation in estimated air pollution concentrations differ by estimation method. Although we did not find strong evidence supporting impact of gaseous pollutants on brain changes detectable by MRI, point estimates suggested associations between higher exposure to CO, NOx, and NO2 and smaller regional brain volumes. Analyses of air pollution and dementia-related outcomes that do not adjust for location likely underestimate uncertainty and may be susceptible to confounding bias. https://doi.org/10.1289/EHP13906
Introduction
Growing evidence links air pollution to late-life cognitive health. Currently, the strongest evidence supports an effect of particulate matter (PM) air pollution.1 In comparison with PM, fewer studies have considered gaseous pollutants; however, gaseous pollutants deserve further attention, because they also may affect brain health. Exposure to gaseous pollutants may induce systemic and cerebrovascular inflammatory and oxidative processes, which could lead to brain cell damage through damaging processes such as neuroinflammation and lipid peroxidation and protein oxidation2,3; both inflammatory and oxidative processes and brain cell damage have been suggested in several animal studies,4–18 although results were not universal.19 Further, ozone (O3) and nitrogen dioxide (NO2) have been shown to affect brain amyloid levels, a hallmark of Alzheimer disease (AD), in several experimental animal studies.20–23 In addition, some observational studies, including a nationwide study in China and a study among patients in London, Ontario, Canada, suggest that exposure to certain gaseous pollutants could promote development of atherosclerosis,24,25 which can contribute to thromboembolic events and ischemic strokes. These events are commonly part of the pathophysiological process underlying vascular dementia.26
Despite the potential pathophysiological connections, the impact of gaseous pollutants on late-life cognitive or brain health remains inconclusive with conflicting results seen between existing observational studies. Studies on NO2, nitrogen oxides (NOx) or O3 and cognition, cognitive change, or dementia have shown mixed results.27–41 Studies on carbon monoxide (CO) and cognition are more limited; one study found higher exposure to ambient CO was associated with lower global cognition, attention, and executive function scores among older adults in South Korea.34 Results were mixed for two studies of CO and dementia based in Taiwan.42,43 A few studies exist on associations between gaseous pollutants and brain imaging outcomes. Results for NO2 or NOx and MRI brain changes were heterogeneous.31,32,44–48 We are aware of only one study each for O3 and CO and brain imaging. No significant results were found in a study of O3 and brain volumes and subclinical infarcts in a subcohort of the Northern Manhattan Study.44 CO exposure was associated with higher risk of brain infarcts in a study based in China.46
Overall, the research linking gaseous pollutants to late-life cognitive health is inconclusive and limited for certain pollutants such as O3 and CO, and few studies have quantified the association between gaseous pollutants and MRI biomarkers, which provide an opportunity to quantify pathogenic change in vivo. Here, we build on prior work by our team in the Atherosclerosis Risk in Communities (ARIC) Study, which considered associations between fine PM [PM with aerodynamic diameter ≤2.5μm (PM2.5)] and course PM with aerodynamic diameter ≤10μm (PM10) exposures and MRI measures of brain health,49 by quantifying the associations between gaseous pollutants (NOx, NO2, O3, and CO) and MRI markers of neurodegeneration and cerebrovascular disease. In addition, we explore several methodological questions related to the study of air pollution and brain health. Specifically, we explore the possible impact of spatial confounding, a potential issue in air pollution–health studies,50 by conducting studies stratified by study site and without accounting for site. Further, given existence of multiple air pollution exposure estimation methods, we compare gaseous pollutant concentrations across several estimation methods and assess whether choice of method impacts results.
Materials and Methods
Cohort
The Atherosclerosis Risk in Communities (ARIC) cohort study comprises 15,792 individuals recruited from 1987 to 1989 at 45 to 64 y of age, from Forsyth County, North Carolina (NC); Jackson, Mississippi (MS); suburbs of Minneapolis, Minnesota (MN); and Washington County, Maryland (MD). Race was self-reported through selection from a predetermined list (“American Indian or Alaskan Indian,” “Asian,” “Black,” “White”); data on ethnicity were not collected. Three of the four ARIC sites are racially homogenous: Almost all participants in the MN and MD sites are White, and all participants in the MS site are Black. Participants have completed multiple study visits since recruitment. ARIC Visit 5 participants at all four sites were invited to participate in a 3 Tesla (3T) MRI in 2011–2013 using a stratified random sampling approach, which selected all persons with a previous ARIC study brain MRI or cognitive impairment defined by low or declining cognitive test scores at Visit 5, and a random sample of participants in strata defined by age (above and below age 80 y) at each of the four study sites to ensure adequate representation by age and site.51 This approach allows weighting back to the full Visit 5 ARIC sample using cohort-derived weights and allays concerns about selection bias and lack of generalizability that arise when MRI samples are overly enriched in young, cognitively intact individuals.
Exclusions
Our sample was restricted to ARIC participants who completed 3T brain MRIs at Visit 5 (2011–2013, n=1,978). After excluding participants from small race–site categories (non-White in MD or MN, non-White or non-Black in NC, n=15, given insufficient numbers to control for confounding by other race-site groups); history of tumor, surgery, or radiation to the head, multiple sclerosis, or implausible estimated total intracranial volume (n=17); missing total brain volume (n=6); missing air pollution concentrations (Method 1, 12km, n=83); missing APOE genotype information (n=64); missing neighborhood socioeconomic position (SEP) at Visit 4 (1996–1998, n=124); or missing data on other key covariates (n=4); 1,665 participants were eligible for inclusion in analyses. Sample sizes after excluding persons with missing exposure data for other exposure estimation methods varied by method (described below): n=1,580 for Method 1, 1.33km; n=1,608 for Method 1, 4km; n=1,665 for Method 1, finest available; n=1,577 for Method 2, and n=1,665 for Method 3. Sample sizes for each analysis further varied by outcome based on variability in missingness of outcome data across outcomes.
Gaseous Air Pollutant Exposures
We used three different approaches to estimate 10-y average air pollution concentrations, which were linked to geocoded participant residential addresses. Addresses were collected at ARIC visits and annual telephone interviews and geocoded with high accuracy by a commercial vendor.52,53 Pollutants of interest included NO2, NOx, 8-h and 24-h O3, and CO. Not all exposures were estimated by all methods, as detailed below.
Method 1 (M1).
Method 1 estimated annual concentrations of NO2, NOx, 8-h and 24-h O3, and CO. In brief, this method uses a chemical transport model, the Community Multiscale Air Quality (CMAQ) model, and two different emission inventories [the US Environmental Protection Agency (US EPA) National Emissions Inventory (NEI) and the European Union Emissions Database for Global Atmospheric Research (EDGAR) emissions inventory] to estimate two sets of concentrations (CMAQ-NEI, CMAQ-EDGAR) for 4 representative months of each year, which were averaged to annual means. Use of 4 representative months, rather than modeling the full 12 months, reduced computational time with little impact on accuracy of resulting annual averages. The weighted average of the CMAQ-NEI and CMAQ-EDGAR annual average concentrations was then adjusted with an observational data fusing technique to maximize agreement with observed concentrations; this approach spatially interpolates differences between estimated and observed concentrations at known spatial locations to create and apply adjustments to all gridded exposure concentrations allowing for correction of systematic bias.54,55 Observational data came from US EPA Air Quality Standards (AQS) Data Mart. Method 1 was used to generate gridded concentrations of 1.33km (M1_1km), 4km (M1_4km), and 12km (M1_12km) grid cell sizes in nested domains centered on the ARIC sites (Figure 1). In addition to considering resolution-specific concentrations, we derived a concentration (M1_f) using the finest spatial resolution available for each participant (i.e., 1.33km if available, otherwise 4km if available, otherwise 12km). Participants were matched to concentrations based on the grid cell in which their addresses were located. Cross-validation spatial R2s relative to observed concentrations for the estimated annual average concentrations from 1990 to 2012 within the domains centered on the four ARIC sites were 0.50, 0.50, and 0.59 for 12km, 4km, and 1.33km resolution CO, respectively; 0.72, 0.49, and 0.67 for 12km, 4km, and 1.33km resolution NO2, respectively; and 0.56 and 0.60 for 12km and 4km resolution 24-h O3, respectively.
Figure 1. Map of nested domains in the United States with grid cell sizes 12-km (D002–D004), 4-km (D005–D008), and 1.33-km (D009–D012) centered on the ARIC cohort sites used for the CMAQ-NEI/CMAQ-EDGAR+ Observational Data Fusing exposure estimation method (Method 1). Domain boundaries are provided as labeled boxes, whereas US state and county boundaries are demarcated with black and gray solid lines. Maps were created using GNUplot with state and country boundaries shapefiles from the US Census Bureau. Note: ARIC, Atherosclerosis Risk in Communities cohort; CMAQ, Community Multiscale Air Quality chemical transport model; EDGAR, Emissions Database for Global Atmospheric Research; NEI, National Emissions Inventory; US, United States.
Method 2 (M2).
The second method (M2) used ArcGIS 10.2 to estimate daily concentrations of NO2, NOx, and 24-h O3 via national log-normal ordinary kriging.56–58 Daily concentrations from monitors with 18 or more hours of AQS data per day were used to derive daily means. To predict unobserved air pollution concentrations, the estimated spherical semivariogram, representative of the observed estimated spatial autocorrelation was used, with measurement error set to 0. The daily concentrations were averaged to create annual means. Point-level concentrations were matched to participant addresses. Average root mean square standardized values for 2000, 2005, and 2010 ranged from 0.85 to 0.92 for NO2, 0.89 to 0.95 for NOx, and 0.76 to 0.82 for O3.59
Method 3 (M3).
Method 3 (M3) derived 1-wk estimated concentrations for NO2 and 24-h O3 using regionalized universal kriging with land-use regression (LUR) and partial least squares regression (PLSR) derived separately for nine US regions.60,61 Input data included monitor data from the AQS, Multi-Ethnic Study of Atherosclerosis (MESA), and New York City Community Air Survey, and smoothed temporal trend basis functions were derived using monitors active over substantial periods of time. Monthly concentrations provided to our research team were averaged to create annual means. Point-level exposures were matched to participant addresses. Cross-validation spatial R2 relative to observed concentrations for annual average concentrations calculated nationwide separately by calendar year from 1990 to 2010 ranged from 0.79