Journals & Books
Help
Search
My account
Sign in
Access through your institution
Purchase PDF
Article preview
Abstract
Introduction
Section snippets
References (61)
Cited by (32)
Current Opinion in Food Science
Volume 11
, October 2016, Pages 34-39
The fate of deoxynivalenol through wheat processing to food products
Author links open overlay panel
Arnau Vidal
,
Vicente Sanchis
,
Antonio J Ramos
,
Sonia Marín
Show more
Add to Mendeley
Share
Cite
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cofs.2016.09.001
Get rights and content
Highlights
•
Deoxynivalenol is not completely removed through wheat processing.
•
Milling and ozonation are the food processes with the highest deoxynivalenol reduction.
•
Deoxynivalenol can increase during breadmaking process, due to release from flour.
•
There is a high increase of deoxynivalenol-3-glucoside during breadmaking process.
•
More information about deoxynivalenol degradation products is necessary.
Deoxynivalenol (DON) is one of the most frequently occurring mycotoxin in wheat crops worldwide and it poses a risk to human and animal health due to its wide range of adverse effects. As its accumulation at field seems to be unavoidable, it is very important to investigate its stability during food processing. Recent outcomes of DON stability during milling, fermentation, and baking show some opportunities to reduce DON. In-depth knowledge of such processes is required. Moreover, DON-3-glucoside seems to increase during the breadmaking process, thus actions to prevent this to occur are required. Finally, recent studies have pointed out that ozonation may help reducing DON content in wheat, which provides a new alternative to the food industry.
Introduction
Fusarium species produce a heterogeneous blend of mycotoxins known as trichothecenes. The most abundant trichothecene is deoxynivalenol (DON), also known as vomitoxin. It is mainly produced by Fusarium graminearum and Fusarium culmorum [1] and it is not classified as to its carcinogenicity to human by IARC (International Agency for Research on Cancer) [2]. However, DON can inhibit the synthesis of proteins when humans or animals ingest contaminated food, causing immune dysregulation, chronic autoimmune diseases and aberrant intercellular signalling [3]. Recent exposition studies showed the high exposure of human to DON, with high percentages of population exceeding the tolerable daily intake [4, 5]. The high presence of DON in human urine is mostly attributed to consumption of contaminated wheat derived products [6].
Wheat is highly susceptible to DON accumulation in field, and a high percentage of analyzed wheat samples, often above 85%, contain DON [7, 8, 9]. Due to the high presence of DON in raw wheat, studying the stability of DON during food processing is critical. In addition, some studies showed that despite cereal processing, wheat based products also contain relatively high DON concentrations such as 246 ng/g [6] and 437 ng/g [10] in bread, 137.1 ng/g in pasta [11] and 14.6 ng/mL in beer [12]. In recent years research has been mainly focussed in DON stability during milling and breadmaking (Figure 1). Moreover, wheat treatment with ozone has been proposed as a new alternative in the last few years [13•].
The co-occurrence of conjugated DON forms has been documented in raw wheat, especially deoxynivalenol-3-glucoside (DON-3-glucoside) [14, 15] which is a plant metabolite of DON [16]. Despite the high presence of DON-3-glucoside in wheat, few studies exist on its occurrence.
The present review summarizes the latest outcomes in DON and DON-3-glucoside stability during different food processes, in particular milling, fermentation and baking, as well as ozonation.
Section snippets
Milling
Most of the wheat harvested in the world is subjected to milling. A large amount of studies have been made about how wheat milling can affect DON reduction [17, 18, 19, 20]. DON is not eliminated during this step but it is only redistributed and concentrated in certain milling fractions. Milling of DON contaminated wheat results in less contaminated fractions intended for human consumption (flour or semolina); while concentration is observed in the animal feed fractions (bran, shorts and
Increasing interest in DON-3-glucoside
The availability of DON-3-glucoside standards has triggered the number of studies. Results show that DON-3-glucoside and DON in milling fractions is similar and the bran fractions were clearly higher contaminated with the DON-3-glucoside [26••, 28, 54]. Recently, Vidal et al. [45••] showed that DON-3-glucoside may be released under mild baking conditions of temperature and time (for instance, 140 °C for 35 min or 200 °C for less than 10 min) but reduced under harsher baking conditions (i.e., longer
Conclusions
Although difficult to remove, some possibilities for DON reduction through wheat processing exist. In-depth knowledge of the food processes is, however, required to avoid those practices which could lead to increasing DON presence. DON-3-glucoside is of concern during breadmaking process because high increases of concentration are detected at the end of the baking process. There are still many factors to investigate which may affect DON stability. In recent years, ozonation has been proven to
References and recommended reading
Papers of particular interest, published within the period of review, have been highlighted as:
• of special interest
•• of outstanding interest
Acknowledgements
The authors thank the Spanish Ministry of Economy and Competitiveness (project AGL2014-55379-P) A. Vidal thanks the Spanish Ministry of Economy and Competitiveness for the pre-doctoral grant.
References (61)
E. Richard et al.
Toxigenic fungi and mycotoxins in mature corn silage
Food Chem Toxicol
(2007)
E. Heyndrickx et al.
Human biomonitoring of multiple mycotoxins in the Belgian population: results of the BIOMYCO study
Environ Int
(2015)
A. Vanheule et al.
The compositional mosaic of Fusarium species and their mycotoxins in unprocessed cereals, food and feed products in Belgium
Int J Food Microbiol
(2014)
Y. Liu et al.
Occurrence of deoxynivalenol in wheat, Hebei Province, China
Food Chem
(2016)
G.D. Savi et al.
Deoxynivalenol in the wheat milling process and wheat-based products and daily intake estimates for the Southern Brazilian population
Food Control
(2016)
L. González-Osnaya et al.
Occurrence of deoxynivalenol and T-2 toxin in bread and pasta commercialised in Spain
Food Chem
(2011)
M. Kushiro
Effects of milling and cooking processes on the deoxynivalenol content in wheat
Int J Mol Sci
(2008)
H. Zhang et al.
Fate of deoxynivalenol and deoxynivalenol-3-glucoside during wheat milling and Chinese steamed bread processing
Food Control
(2014)
Y. Zheng et al.
Effect of milling on the content of deoxynivalenol, nivalenol, and zearalenone in Japanese wheat
Food Control
(2014)
C. Schwake-Anduschus et al.
Distribution of deoxynivalenol, zearalenone, and their respective modified analogues in milling fractions of naturally contaminated wheat grains
World Mycotoxin J
(2015)
View more references
Cited by (32)
Mycobiome mediates the interaction between environmental factors and mycotoxin contamination in wheat grains
2024, Science of the Total Environment
Show abstract
Assessment of the concentrations of ochratoxin A, zearalenone, and deoxynivalenol during cracker production
2023, Journal of Food Composition and Analysis
Citation Excerpt :
Consequently, the occurrence of mycotoxins in raw materials is of vast concern for the food industry since it may lead to public health issues and economic losses (Bangar et al., 2022; Heshmati et al., 2021; Mokhtarian et al., 2020; Jafari et al., 2021). Food processing plays a critical role in reducing mycotoxin contaminations in raw materials and ensuring food safety (Vidal et al. 2016). Some studies have indicated that the fermentation and baking procedures used in cracker manufacture significantly affect the levels of parent mycotoxins in the final product (Generotti et al., 2017; Scudamore et al., 2009; Stadler et al., 2019; Suman et al., 2012; Pires et al., 2022).
Show abstract
Standardization of near infrared hyperspectral imaging for wheat single kernel sorting according to deoxynivalenol level
2021, Food Research International
Show abstract
Standardisation of near infrared hyperspectral imaging for quantification and classification of DON contaminated wheat samples
2020, Food Control
Citation Excerpt :
Although different preharvest strategies have been applied to minimise DON presence in wheat, the problem still remains (Edwards & Jennings, 2018). Moreover, DON is not fully destroyed by any of the food processing methods (Vidal, Sanchis, Ramos, & Marin, 2016). As a consequence, monitoring of wheat batches prior entering the food chain is a key point in order to divert highly contaminated batches.
Show abstract
Use of hyperspectral imaging as a tool for Fusarium and deoxynivalenol risk management in cereals: A review
2020, Food Control
Show abstract
The mycotoxin patulin: An updated short review on occurrence, toxicity and analytical challenges
2019, Food and Chemical Toxicology
Citation Excerpt :
The incidence of PAT in recent researches pinpointed the importance to strengthen control strategies for PAT during food production. During food processing, mycotoxins are highly stable, however, different factors can affect the mycotoxin stability (Vidal et al., 2016b). Cleaning, washing, milling and pressing indicated a reduction of up to 55% of PAT (Acar et al., 1998).
Show abstract
View all citing articles on Scopus
View full text
© 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
Part of special issue
Food mycology
Edited by Sonia Marin
Other articles from this issue
Alternaria in food products
October 2016
Andrea Patriarca
Recent advances in modeling the risk of mycotoxin contamination in crops
October 2016
Paola Battilani
Plant essential oils against food borne fungi and mycotoxins
October 2016
Abhishek Kumar Dwivedy, …, Nawal Kishore Dubey
View more articles
Recommended articles
Evaluation of the toxicity and chemical alterations of deoxynivalenol degradation products under ozone treatment
Food Control, Volume 124, 2021, Article 107937
Yang Yang, …, Jian Ji
The ``-omics’’ contributions to the understanding of mycotoxin production under diverse environmental conditions
Current Opinion in Food Science, Volume 23, 2018, pp. 97-104
Esther Garcia-Cela, …, Angel Medina
Biotransformation of the mycotoxin enniatin B1 in pigs: A comparative and approach
Food and Chemical Toxicology, Volume 105, 2017, pp. 506-517
Lada Ivanova, …, Christiane Kruse Fæste
Show 3 more articles
Article Metrics
Citations
Citation Indexes:
27
Captures
Readers:
44
View details
About ScienceDirect
Remote access
Shopping cart
Advertise
Contact and support
Terms and conditions
Privacy policy
Cookies are used by this site.
Cookie Settings
All content on this site: Copyright © 2024 Elsevier B.V., its licensors, and contributors. All rights are reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. For all open access content, the Creative Commons licensing terms apply.
We use cookies that are necessary to make our site work. We may also use additional cookies to analyze, improve, and personalize our content and your digital experience. For more information, see ourCookie Policy
Cookie Settings
Accept all cookies