Loading [MathJax]/jax/output/HTML-CSS/config.js
Your privacy, your choice
We use essential cookies to make sure the site can function. We, and our 209 partners, also use optional cookies and similar technologies for advertising, personalisation of content, usage analysis, and social media.
By accepting optional cookies, you consent to allowing us and our partners to store and access personal data on your device, such as browsing behaviour and unique identifiers. Some third parties are outside of the European Economic Area, with varying standards of data protection. See our privacy policy for more information on the use of your personal data. Your consent choices apply to nature.com and applicable subdomains.
You can find further information, and change your preferences via 'Manage preferences'.
You can also change your preferences or withdraw consent at any time via 'Your privacy choices', found in the footer of every page.
We use cookies and similar technologies for the following purposes:
Store and/or access information on a device
Personalised advertising and content, advertising and content measurement, audience research and services development
Accept all cookies
Reject optional cookies
Manage preferences
Skip to main content
Advertisement
View all journals
Search
Log in
Explore content
About the journal
Publish with us
Sign up for alerts
RSS feed
nature nature medicine articles article
Article
Open access
Published: 03 June 2024
Geographic sources of ozone air pollution and mortality burden in Europe
Hicham Achebak
, Roger Garatachea
, María Teresa Pay, Oriol Jorba, Marc Guevara, Carlos Pérez García-Pando
& Joan Ballester
  Nature Medicine
 30, 
1732–1738 (2024)Cite this article
3626 Accesses
171 Altmetric
Metrics
Abstract
Ground-level ozone (O3) is a harmful air pollutant formed in the atmosphere by the interaction between sunlight and precursor gases. Exposure to current O3 levels in Europe is a major source of premature mortality from air pollution. However, mitigation actions have been mainly designed and implemented at the national and regional scales, lacking a comprehensive assessment of the geographic sources of O3 pollution and its associated health impacts. Here we quantify both national and imported contributions to O3 and their related mortality burden across 813 contiguous regions in 35 European countries, representing about 530 million people. Imported O3 contributed to 88.3% of all O3-attributable deaths (intercountry range 83–100%). The greatest share of imported O3 had its origins outside the study domain (that is, hemispheric sources), which was responsible for 56.7% of total O3-attributable mortality (range 42.5–87.2%). It was concluded that achieving the air-quality guidelines set out by the World Health Organization and avoiding the health impacts of O3 require not only the implementation of national or coordinated pan-European actions but also global strategies.
Similar content being viewed by others
Global fine-scale changes in ambient NO2 during COVID-19 lockdowns
Article Open access
19 January 2022
Comprehensive analysis of long-term trends, meteorological influences, and ozone formation sensitivity in the Jakarta Greater Area
Article Open access
26 April 2024
Sustained emission reductions have restrained the ozone pollution over China
Article 28 September 2023
Main
Ground-level ozone (O3) is a harmful air pollutant formed in the troposphere by the interaction between sunlight and precursor gases, mainly nitrogen oxides (NOx) and volatile organic compounds (VOCs), from natural and anthropogenic sources. High ambient O3 levels are observed especially during the warm season, and these are associated with a range of adverse respiratory health outcomes such as aggravation of asthma, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, lower lung function and infections, leading in the most severe cases to hospitalization and death1,2,3.
Exposure to current O3 levels in Europe is a major source of premature mortality from air pollution, especially in summer, and its impact has increased over time due to the effect of rising temperatures on O3 concentrations4,5. However, according to the European Environmental Agency (EEA)4, >95% of the population in Europe remains exposed to O3 levels that exceed the air-quality guidelines (daily maximum 8-h average of 100 µg m−3) set out by the World Health Organization (WHO)6, within the context of accelerated urbanization and demographic aging that increases the background health risks of exposed populations.
The health impacts of O3, and generally of any air pollutant, are, however, far from being a local issue7,8. O3 concentrations in a given location greatly depend on the tropospheric transport of the pollutant itself, or that of its precursors, from far-distant sources9,10. For instance, a study11 in south-western Europe showed that imported O3 is the largest contributor to ground-level O3 concentrations, accounting for 46–68% of daily surface levels. This emphasizes the need for coordinated actions among countries to reduce O3 concentrations and health impacts, given that no effective strategy may be developed without international agreement on air pollution reduction.
Several studies have estimated the mortality burden attributable to tropospheric O3 in different settings2,12,13,14, but a continent-wide assessment of the contribution of O3 pollution by geographical source is still lacking. In the present study we quantify the health impacts of transboundary-transported O3 (daily maximum 8-h average) in Europe. Our focus is on the transboundary health effects of O3 due to its ability to persist over long distances in the free troposphere during transport, in contrast to its precursors such as NO2 that have shorter lifetimes. This health impact assessment integrates air-quality modeling as a source-apportionment method and exposure–response associations characterizing the effects of O3 on human mortality as a starting point for the development of a coordinated agenda to effectively minimize the health effects of air pollution over the continent.
Results
Descriptive statistics
The results of this Europe-wide study are presented at both the national (35 countries) and subnational (813 regions) level. The average concentration of O3 across countries and the study period was 101.9 μg m−3, ranging from 76.7 μg m−3 in Finland to 130.1 μg m−3 in Malta (Supplementary Table 1). As expected, the spatial distribution of O3 is found to be latitudinally oriented, with concentrations decreasing northwards, given that the warmer temperatures in the south favor the formation of O3, especially in summer (Fig. 1a). The estimated number of deaths attributable to O3 over the entire European domain during the warm seasons of 2015–2017 was 114,447 (95% empirical confidence interval (eCI) 76,539–152,108), resulting in an attributable mortality rate of 72.0 (95% eCI 48.1–95.6) annual deaths per 1 million inhabitants. The highest mortality burdens are estimated for those countries with the largest populations (Germany, Italy, France, the UK, Spain and Poland; Supplementary Table 2) whereas the highest mortality rates were in the south-eastern countries (Bulgaria, Serbia, Croatia, Hungary, Greece and Romania; Fig. 1b and Supplementary Table 3).
Fig. 1: O3 levels and associated mortality during the warm season (May–September), 2015–2017.
a, Average daily mean 8-h maximum O3 (µg m−3). b, Mortality (annual deaths per 1 million population) attributable to O3. a,b, Histograms depict both the color legend and the number of regions for each value.
Full size image
O3 levels and associated premature mortality
Figure 2 and Supplementary Tables 1 and 2 show the contribution to O3 concentrations and attributable deaths for each country analyzed according to the source of origin of O3 and its precursor emissions: (1) national, (2) the 34 other European countries, (3) other countries inside the study domain, (4) ocean and sea inside the study domain and (5) outside the study domain (that is, hemispheric sources). Imported (that is, non-national) O3 is associated with 88.3% of all attributable deaths, ranging from 83.0% in Italy to 100% in Liechtenstein. The greatest share of transported O3 had its origin outside the study domain, which was associated with 56.7% of total attributable mortality, ranging from 42.5% in Malta to 87.2% in Iceland. Moreover, imported O3 from the 34 other European countries also had a substantial attributable mortality impact (20.9%; intercountry range 5.1–40.0%) across the countries analyzed, whereas maritime transport contribution (7.2%; range 0–24.1%) was noticeable in smaller southern European countries such as Malta (24.1%) and Cyprus (14.0%). Results for the 813 regions are additionally provided in Supplementary Tables 4–6.
Fig. 2: O3 levels and associated mortality according to O3 emission sources in 35 European countries, 2015–2017.
a, Average daily mean 8-h maximum O3 (µg m−3). b, Mortality attributable to O3 (annual deaths per 1 million population). Horizontal bars represent 95% eCI of overall O3-attributable mortality (that is, the sum of the five contribution sources).
Full size image
Country-to-country O3-attributable mortality contribution
The matrix of attributable mortality due to imported–exported O3 among the 35 European countries included in the analysis is depicted in Fig. 3. The most industrialized and populated countries are the major contributors to mortality attributable to transported transboundary O3, especially France (4,003 deaths during the warm season (May–September) of 2015–2017) and Germany (3,260 deaths). For instance, O3 originating from France has a substantial impact on mortality in neighboring countries including Luxembourg (32.3% of O3-attributable deaths), Switzerland (29.3%), Belgium (24.4%), Liechtenstein (20.2%), Spain (16.8%) and Germany (16.3%). O3 originating from Germany also substantially impacts mortality in neighboring countries including Luxembourg (24.2% of deaths), the Czech Republic (Czechia, 23.3%), the Netherlands (21.5%), Denmark (20.3%), Austria (19.9%), Belgium (17.8%) and Poland (17.2%).
Fig. 3: Country-to-country O3-attributable mortality contribution in Europe, 2015–2017.
Each grid cell of the matrix shows the AF (%) in a country (row) due to O3 produced in another country (column). The diagonal represents mortality caused by national (that is, non-imported) O3. The number of attributable deaths that occurred in each country is shown on the right, and thus the sum of the grid cells in a row is always equal to 100% while the number of attributable deaths caused by each county is shown at the top. Country abbreviations used here are given in Methods.
Full size image
Figure 4 shows regional maps of mortality caused by the major exporting countries, namely Germany, France, the UK, Italy, Spain and Poland. These maps emphasize the importance of the prevailing large-scale winds in the mid-latitudes (that is, the westerlies), which characterize an eastward plume of deaths attributable to transboundary-transported O3. Consequently, the south-western European countries are less affected by the health effects of transboundary-transported O3. Thus Spain (53.7%), France (47.1%) and Portugal (46.2%) are the countries with the largest attributable mortality due to national O3 production (Fig. 3) and the smallest imported:exported ratio of attributable deaths (Fig. 5).
Fig. 4: O3-attributable mortality caused by major O3 precursor-emitting countries, 2015–2017.
a–f, Estimates are expressed as annual deaths per 1 million population: Germany (a); France (b); UK (c); Italy (d); Spain (e); and Poland (f).
Full size image
Fig. 5: Ratio of national to imported O3-attributable deaths, 2015–2017.
The histogram depicts both the color legend and the number of regions for each ratio, with a large number of regions where imported O3 deaths predominated over those nationally generated. The imported fraction refers to imports from the 34 other European countries.
Full size image
Sensitivity analysis
The mortality estimates reported are based on the whole range of O3 exposures. We performed a sensitivity analysis to evaluate the effect of a safe threshold at 70 µg m−3, in which (1) the exposure–response function between O3 and mortality was centered at 70 µg m−3 and (2) days when O3 concentrations were <70 µg m−3 were excluded (that is, days <70 µg m−3 are not harmful and health effects start to increase log-linearly beyond this threshold). Specifically, the number of deaths was reduced by a factor of nearly three, resulting in 36,523 (95% eCI 24,382–48,633) attributable deaths during the warm months (May–September) of 2015–2017 or, in other words, 23.0 (95% eCI 15.3–30.6) annual deaths per 1 million inhabitants (Extended Data Fig. 1). However, the apportionment of mortality according to O3-attributed sources (that is, countries) changed minimally (Extended Data Figs. 2 and 3).
Discussion
This study presents an integrated, continent-wide analysis of mortality burden due to transported transboundary O3 in Europe. We found that only a small fraction of O3-attributable deaths was due to national sources (11.7%). The largest mortality burden was, instead, associated with hemispheric O3 transported from outside the European domain (56.7%). Moreover, the contribution of other European countries to each of the countries analyzed also had a substantial impact on mortality (20.9%). In some coastal regions and smaller countries in the Mediterranean, the contribution of maritime emissions on mortality was considerable.
The findings of our study have implications for air-quality and public health policies across Europe. Thus far, mitigation efforts have primarily focused on national and regional scales, lacking a comprehensive, transboundary assessment of pollution sources and their associated mortality. Future research should refine the present study by analyzing the contribution to mortality of the different economic sectors or activities, by country, to transported transboundary O3 (for example, energy, industry, transportation, residential and agriculture). This characterization of health impacts by type of emission would shed additional light on the interventions required in key strategic economic sectors