Log in
or
Register
Get new issue alerts
Secondary Logo
Journal Logo
Advanced Search
Articles and Issues
For Authors
Journal Info
ISEE




ORIGINAL RESEARCH ARTICLE
Pregnancy outcomes as related to in utero exposure to air pollution and greenness: The Life-GAP Project
Sinsamala, Robin M.a,*; Johannessen, Aneb; Bertelsen, Randi J.c; Accordini, Simoned; Brandt, Jørgene; Frohn, Lise M.e; Geels, Camillae; Gislason, Thorarinnf,g; Holm, Mathiash; Janson, Christeri; Markevych, Ianaj,k; Orru, Hansl; Real, Francisco Gómezc,m; Sigsgaard, Torbenn; Skulstad, Svein M.c; Svanes, Ceciliea,o; Marcon, Alessandrod
Author Information
Environmental Epidemiology 8(4):p e318, August 2024. | DOI: 10.1097/EE9.0000000000000318
OPEN
SDC
Metrics
Abstract
Background: 
Lower birth weight and preterm birth may increase the risk of adverse health outcomes later in life. We examined whether maternal exposure to air pollution and greenness during pregnancy is associated with offspring birth weight and preterm birth.
Methods: 
We analyzed data on 4286 singleton births from 2358 mothers from Respiratory Health in Northern Europe, a prospective questionnaire-based cohort study (1990–2010). Mixed-effects regression models with random intercepts for mothers and centers were used to estimate the association of exposures to particulate matter (PM2.5 and PM10), nitrogen dioxide (NO2), ozone (O3), black carbon (BC), and greenness (Normalized Difference Vegetation Index in 300m-buffers [NDVI300m]) with birth outcomes, adjusting for potential confounders.
Results: 
Median (interquartile range [IQR]) exposures to PM2.5, PM10, NO2, O3, BC, and NDVI300m during pregnancy were 8.4(5.0) µg/m3, 14.4(8.3) µg/m3, 14.0(11.0) µg/m3, 54.7(10.2) µg/m3, 0.47(0.41) µg/m3, and 0.31(0.20), respectively. IQR increases in air pollution exposures during pregnancy were associated with decreased birth weight and the strongest association was seen for PM2.5 (−49g; 95% confidence interval [CI] = −83, −16). However, O3 showed an opposite association. IQR increase in NDVI300m was associated with an increase in birth weight of 25 g (95% CI = 7, 44). Preterm birth was not associated with the exposures.
Conclusion: 
Increased greenness and decreased air pollution may contribute to healthier pregnancies and improve overall health in the next generation. This emphasizes the need to adopt policies that target the reduction of air pollution emissions and exposure of the population.
What this study adds
This study documented the association between in utero exposure to air pollution and the risk of lower birth weight in Northern European countries, where air pollution concentrations are relatively low. It also strengthens the knowledge base related to the beneficial effect of greenness (Normalized Difference Vegetation Index) exposure with birth weight. The associations estimated for Normalized Difference Vegetation Index exposure were independent from concomitant air pollution exposures, as illustrated by mutually adjusted models. Sensitivity and secondary analyses validated the robustness of the observed associations. Further analysis on exposure to PM and NO2 above the WHO air quality guidelines levels and birth weight highlighted the need to adhere to WHO recommendations.
Introduction
Adverse birth outcomes that are markers of intrauterine growth retardation, such as low birth weight, preterm birth, and small for gestational age, have been linked to air pollution exposure during pregnancy.1 Low birth weight, (LBW), high birth weight (HBW), and preterm birth (PTB) are all associated with other detrimental neonatal outcomes and severe long-term health effects extending into adulthood.2–4 Plausible biological mechanisms, such as oxidative stress, inflammation, mitochondrial and nuclear DNA methylation, and endocrine disruption, have been hypothesized to explain some of the negative pregnancy outcomes associated with exposure to air pollution.5 Recent evidence also suggests that preconception exposure in the parental generation may influence the health outcomes of the offspring through epigenetic mechanisms. It is proposed that parental exposure to adverse environmental conditions could alter the germ cell epigenome structure, which may then be transmitted to the offspring and impact different health outcomes.6,7
Emerging evidence from several studies suggests that greenness may mitigate the harmful health effects caused by air pollution.8,9 Exposure to greenness has shown a positive impact on health, including pregnancy outcomes; however, some of the findings are inconclusive.10 Although the mechanisms are not fully understood, certain pathways have been proposed to elucidate how greenness may be beneficial for improved pregnancy outcomes, including promoting physical activity, reducing psychophysiological stress, reducing environmental exposures such as ambient air pollution and high temperature, and improving mental health by promoting interpersonal contacts and community belonging.11,12
There is substantial evidence supporting the adverse impact of prenatal air pollution exposure with several adverse birth outcomes, although heterogeneity between studies exists.13–16 For instance, consistent associations have been shown between particulate matter (PM) exposure during pregnancy and LBW, while there are less consistent associations of PM exposure with PTB or macrosomia.1
Most evidence on the effects of in utero and prenatal exposures derives from studies conducted in settings where air pollution concentrations largely exceed the air quality guideline (AQG) levels recommended by the WHO.17,18 However, it is imperative to conduct research also in low air pollution settings to gain a comprehensive understanding of the effects of exposures across a spectrum of air pollution concentrations. This is essential in striving toward air quality levels that truly safeguard the most vulnerable individuals.19 Using data from the Respiratory Health in Northern Europe (RHINE) study, we aimed to investigate whether maternal exposure to air pollution and greenness during pregnancy are associated with offspring birth weight and PTB. As a secondary aim, we also assessed the relationship between maternal exposure to air pollution and greenness before conception with offspring birth weight.
Methods
Study design and population
RHINE is a prospective questionnaire-based cohort study on a general population aged 20–44 years at baseline that started in 1990 (RHINE 1) with follow-ups every 10 years (ca. 2000 and 2010). It includes seven study centers: Bergen (Norway); Gothenburg, Umea, and Uppsala (Sweden); Aarhus (Denmark); Reykjavik (Iceland); and Tartu (Estonia). The study received approval from the ethical review boards in all centers, according to national legislation, and before participation, written informed consent was obtained. We analyzed birth outcomes of singleton children born to female participants in RHINE after 1990. This year was chosen based on the availability of modeled residential air pollution exposures. Multiple births were excluded a priori as the overall in utero growth pattern is slower for multiple fetuses compared with singletons20 (Figure 1).
Figure 1.: Flowchart of the Respiratory Health in Northern Europe (RHINE) study participants.
Birth outcomes
We examined the following birth outcomes: birth weight (continuous [grams, g]), and the binary outcomes LBW (birth weight <2500 g), HBW (birth weight >4500 g); and PTB (gestation age <37 weeks).21 Data on pregnancy outcomes were obtained through maternal reporting in the second follow-up (RHINE III) for all study centers (except for birth weight data for Reykjavik, which was retrieved from the Icelandic birth registry), along with detailed information on lifestyle factors and comorbidities. The questionnaires concerning pregnancy-related outcomes were validated in a study performed in the Bergen study centre in Norway; agreement for LBW was good (Cohen’s κ = 0.73–85), while PTB showed moderate agreement (Cohen’s κ = 0.60).22
Exposure assessment
We assigned in utero exposures to air pollutants and greenness to each of the children as follows. First, we assigned annual average exposures to the addresses reported by the mothers at RHINE I, II, and III using the methods described in sections 2.4 and 2.5, respectively. Second, we identified the address where the mother lived during the year of pregnancy, which was defined as the year preceding birth year since the exact birth dates were not available. For this purpose, we reconstructed maternal residential histories backward based on information on how long mothers had been living at the addresses reported in RHINE III. For mothers who had moved during the RHINE follow-up period (1990–2010), we used residential addresses and times reported in RHINE II, and residential addresses reported at RHINE I. This resulted in three groups of children assigned to addresses reported in RHINE I, II, and III. Finally, we linked each of these groups to the relevant exposure estimates.
Air pollution exposure
Annual average air pollution concentrations (micrograms per cubic meter, µg/m3) used in this study were obtained from the NordicWelfAir inventory (https://projects.au.dk/nordicwelfair) for all the study centers except Tartu, which was assigned locally. We obtained data for PM with an aerodynamic diameter of ≤2.5 µm and ≤10 µm (PM2.5 and PM10), nitrogen dioxide (NO2), ozone (O3), and black carbon (BC). Concentrations were calculated based on a combined multiscale air pollution modeling system which includes long-range transported air pollution (regional sources), meteorological variations, and local source contribution at high temporal and spatial resolutions.23 Two models were combined: the Danish Eulerian Hemispheric Model (DEHM)24 and the Urban Background Model (UBM).25 The DEHM is a 3-dimensional chemistry-transport model that covers the Northern Hemisphere with a horizontal resolution of 150 km × 150 km. It includes nested domains over Europe with a resolution of 50 km × 50 km and Northern Europe (16.67 km × 16.67 km resolution). The model has 29 vertical layers and covers the lowest approximately 15 km of the atmosphere. It calculates the transport, dispersion, deposition, and chemistry of both anthropogenic and natural emissions. The meteorological data needed for the DEHM (and UBM) model(s) were available from the Weather Research and Forecasting model.26 The DEHM output contains concentration distributions of pollutants that originate from anthropogenic or natural emissions and include primary emitted particles and gases and their chemistry.24 Integrated with DEHM is the UBM, which calculates the transport and dispersion of primary emitted air pollutants from all local sources, such as traffic and residential heating, industry, agriculture, power plants, and so on, and calculates air pollution concentrations, including chemistry of NO, NO2, and O3, on a 1 km × 1 km resolution up to 25 km from all grid points, covering the Nordic countries.25,27,28 Both DEHM and UBM are driven with data from a meteorological model (Weather Research and Forecasting model). The DEHM/UBM air pollution concentrations were evaluated against measurements with correlation coefficient ranging from 0.43 to 0.96 for PM2.5, 0.72 to 0.89 for NO2, and 0.60 to 0.73 for O3 in Denmark, Finland, Norway, and Sweden.25 For Tartu, the data of BC and O3 were not available, but PM2.5, PM10, and NO2 were modeled using the Eulerian air quality dispersion model with the resolution of 1 km × 1 km across Estonia that is part of the Airviro Air Quality Management System (Airviro 2011 [http://smhi.se]). Airviro is a widely used web-based air pollution data management tool that uses data on air pollution emission, ground-level concentrations, and meteorological variables to perform air pollution dispersion modeling and mapping. This has been used in several epidemiological studies.29,30 Detailed description of the model is found in the Airviro User Documentation.31
Greenness exposure
Exposure to greenness was assessed using the Normalized Difference Vegetation Index (NDVI)32 as a proxy for the overall greenness level, which ranges from −1 to +1. Values closer to +1 indicate greener and denser vegetation. Values close to zero indicate arid areas of rocks, sand, or snow, while negative values usually denote water.33 For all the study centers, NDVI rasters were calculated, and NDVI values were assigned to the residential addresses of the participants, using Landsat 4–5 Thematic Mapper TM satellite images retrieved during the most vegetation-rich months (around July–August), closest in time to each RHINE survey. We used mean NDVI values (not restricting to positive values) calculated in circular buffers of 300 m around the participants residential address (NDVI300m) in accordance with WHO recommendations.34
Covariates
Data were obtained from maternal reporting at RHINE III. To identify potential covariates to consider for the analyses, all relevant covariates associated with the exposure and/or the outcome were identified through a review of existing literature,35,36 and a directed acyclic graph (DAG) was made (Figure S1; https://links.lww.com/EE/A287). Among the pregnancy-specific covariates (level-1), infants’ sex (male or female) was included as a precision variable,37 whereas the following were considered as potential confounders: maternal age at child’s birth (continuous, years), parity (primiparous or multiparous), maternal smoking status, and pack-years before pregnancy (coded on 4 levels: light smoking [<5 pack years], moderate smoking [5–10 pack years], heavy smoking [>10 pack years] or no smoking [never smoker]). The mother-specific variables (level 2) considered as potential confounders were obesity at menarche (as an indicator of prepregnancy body composition, obese ≥5 or nonobese <5 on body silhouette chart)38 and educational level (low [primary and secondary] or high [college/university]). Finally, the level-1 variables gestational age (preterm [<37 weeks], term-birth [≥37–42 weeks], or post-term [>42 weeks]) and maternal comorbidities (presence of gestational diabetes, presence of