Journals
Books
Sign in through your institution
Issues
More Content
Submit
Purchase
About
British Journal of Dermatology
This issue
Clinical Medicine
Dermatology
Medicine and Health
Books
Journals
Oxford Academic
Advanced Search
Volume 191 Issue Supplement_1
July 2024
Article Contents
Abstract
< Previous
Next >
JOURNAL ARTICLE
P037 Peripheral blood flow cytometry reveals heterogeneous but benign T-cell changes in patients with severe eczema undergoing dupilumab therapy
Henry Grantham,
Katie Best,
Sophie Weatherhead
British Journal of Dermatology, Volume 191, Issue Supplement_1, July 2024, Page i31, https://doi.org/10.1093/bjd/ljae090.064
Published: 28 June 2024
PDF
Split View
Cite
Permissions
Share
Abstract
The interleukin-4/13 receptor antagonist dupilumab dramatically changed the landscape of eczema treatment following NICE approval in 2018, and many patients now achieve remission or significant symptomatic improvement without notable side-effects. This has led to a rapid uptake in use; our department has > 300 patients with eczema currently taking dupilumab. However, cutaneous T-cell lymphoma (CTCL) can mimic eczema and may respond to conventional systemic therapies; an unproven relationship with dupilumab exists (Park A, Wong L, Lang A et al. Cutaneous T-cell lymphoma following dupilumab use: a systematic review. Int J Dermatol 2023; 62: 962–76). Between 2019 and 2022, five dupilumab-treated patients with ‘eczema’ at our centre were found to have CTCL: three Sézary syndrome (one now deceased) and two atypical CTCL. Whether they had pre-existing CTCL or dupilumab had altered their phenotype was unknown; two of our patients with Sézary syndrome had lifelong eczema. We therefore introduced peripheral blood flow cytometric evaluation as part of our routine dupilumab examinations and 4 months after starting treatment. Furthermore, any patient with atypical eczema received a biopsy prior to starting dupilumab. From June to December 2023, 55 patients (29 female) from our complex eczema clinic started dupilumab. The mean age was 41 years (range 19–90). In total, 62% had atopy, 62% had a family history of eczema and 76% had had eczema since childhood. At baseline, 29% had abnormal peripheral blood flows, but none had Sézary syndrome. Abnormal findings included elevated and reduced CD4 : CD8 ratios (7% and 5%, respectively). Two had clonal changes. So far, in patients with a normal flow completing 4 months of treatment, 50% had normal levels when retested. Abnormal repeat flows in this group included reversed or elevated CD4 : CD8 ratio and new non-Sézary clonal change. Of patients with an abnormal baseline flow, 75% remained static when retested on treatment. One patient’s abnormal clonal population had changed phenotype. Nine patients with atypical eczema had pre-dupilumab biopsies, but none showed features of CTCL. Of the five previously identified patients with CTCL on dupilumab, one responded well to dupilumab and four did not respond. The two patients without Sézary syndrome were both biopsied 1–2 years prior to starting dupilumab, with no suggestion of CTCL. We advocate further investigation including biopsy and flow cytometry in atypical cases prior to dupilumab initiation, as dupilumab can cause CTCL progression in later stages. Flow cytometry is not typically carried out on patients with inflammatory disease, and almost one-third of our patients had an abnormal flow. Prescribers must remain vigilant for unrecognized severe side-effects with new medications. It is reassuring that we have not identified any cases of CTCL from our baseline screening so far, but we cannot exclude the possibility of CTCL developing after starting dupilumab, and we are continuing to monitor these patients.
Issue Section: Abstracts > Bristol Cup Posters
PDF
This content is only available as a PDF.
© The Author(s) 2024. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of British Association of Dermatologists. All rights reserved. For commercial re-use, please contact reprints@oup.com for reprints and translation rights for reprints. All other permissions can be obtained through our RightsLink service via the Permissions link on the article page on our site—for further information please contact journals.permissions@oup.com.
This article is published and distributed under the terms of the Oxford University Press, Standard Journals Publication Model (https://academic.oup.com/pages/standard-publication-reuse-rights)
CITATIONS
0
VIEWS
29
ALTMETRIC
More metrics information
Email alerts
Article activity alert
Advance article alerts
New issue alert
Receive exclusive offers and updates from Oxford Academic
Recommended
The relevance of peripheral blood T‐helper 1 and 2 cytokine pattern in the evaluation of patients with mycosis fungoides and Sézary syndrome
E. Papadavid et al., British Journal of Dermatology, 2003
Chromosomal abnormalities in relation to clinical disease in patients with cutaneous T‐cell lymphoma: a 5‐year follow‐up study
L. Karenko et al., British Journal of Dermatology, 2003
Immunological study on CD3 defective cutaneous T cell lymphoma cells from a patient with Sézary syndrome
S Sano et al., Clinical and Experimental Immunology, 2001
5PSQ-113 Real-life effectiveness, safety and adherence of dupilumab in patients with atopic dermatitis
C Socias Cañellas et al., Eur J Hosp Pharm Sci Pract, 2023
Characterising the chronicity of dupilumab-associated ocular surface disease: an analysis of a retrospective case series
Mélanie Hébert et al., Open Ophthalmology, 2022
2314 Extensive remodelling of the lymphocyte repertoire and deletion of autoreactive clones following AHSCT in MS
Jennifer Massey et al., Neurology Open, 2022
Powered by
I consent to the use of Google Analytics and related cookies across the TrendMD network (widget, website, blog). For more information, see our Privacy Settings and Terms of Use.
Yes No
Citing articles via
Google Scholar
Latest
Most Read
Most Cited
Management of scabies in children under 15 kg and pregnant or breastfeeding women: recommendations supported by the Centre of Evidence of the French Society of Dermatology
Stopping a runaway train: targeting fibrosis in recessive dystrophic epidermolysis bullosa
A nonsense variant in KRT31 is associated with autosomal-dominant monilethrix
Phenotypic and genotypic risk factors for invasive melanoma by sex and body site
Estimating the magnitude and healthcare costs of melanoma in situ and thin invasive melanoma overdiagnosis in Australia
More from Oxford Academic
Clinical Medicine
Dermatology
Medicine and Health
Books
Journals
About British Journal of Dermatology
Editorial Board
Author Guidelines
Recommend to Your Librarian
Advertising and Corporate Services
Journals Career Network
Online ISSN 1365-2133 Print ISSN 0007-0963 Copyright © 2024 British Association of Dermatologists
About Oxford Academic
Publish journals with us
University press partners
What we publish
New features 
Authoring
Open access
Purchasing
Institutional account management
Rights and permissions
Get help with access
Accessibility
Contact us
Advertising
Media enquiries
Oxford University Press
News
Oxford Languages
University of Oxford
Oxford University Press is a department of the University of Oxford. It furthers the University's objective of excellence in research, scholarship, and education by publishing worldwide
Copyright © 2024 Oxford University Press Cookie settings Cookie policy Privacy policy Legal notice
Oxford University Press uses cookies to enhance your experience on our website. By selecting ‘accept all’ you are agreeing to our use of cookies. You can change your cookie settings at any time. More information can be found in our Cookie Policy.
Reject and manage
Accept all