This website uses cookies
We use cookies to personalise content and ads, to provide social media features and to analyse our traffic. We also share information about your use of our site with our social media, advertising and analytics partners who may combine it with other information that you’ve provided to them or that they’ve collected from your use of their services.
Consent Selection
Necessary
Preferences
Statistics
Marketing
Show details
















Deny
Allow selection
Allow all


Journals
Topics Information
Author Services Initiatives
About
Sign In / Sign Up Submit
  Search for Articles:
Dentistry Journal
All Article Types
Advanced
  Journals Dentistry Journal Volume 12 Issue 7 10.3390/dj12070215
Submit to this Journal Review for this Journal Propose a Special Issue
Article Menu
Academic Editor
Patrick R. Schmidlin
Subscribe SciFeed
Related Info Link
More by Authors Links
Article Views
411
Table of Contents
Abstract
Introduction
Materials and Methods
Results
Discussion
Conclusions
Author Contributions
Funding
Conflicts of Interest
Abbreviations
References
share
Share
announcement
Help
format_quote
Cite
question_answer
Discuss in SciProfiles
thumb_up
Endorse
textsms
Comment
first_page
settings
Order Article Reprints
Open AccessSystematic Review
The Correlation between Oral Health and Air Pollution: A Systematic Review
by Bruna Sinjari
1,*,†, Manlio Santilli
1,†, Piero Di Carlo
2, Eleonora Aruffo
2 and Sergio Caputi
1
1
Unit of Prostodontics, Department of Innovative Technologies in Medicine and Dentistry, University “G. d’Annunzio” Chieti-Pescara, 66100 Chieti, Italy
2
Center of Advanced Studies and Technology (CAST), University of “G. d’Annunzio” Chieti-Pescara, 66100 Chieti, Italy
*
Author to whom correspondence should be addressed.
†
These authors contributed equally as first author to this work.
Dent. J. 2024, 12(7), 215; https://doi.org/10.3390/dj12070215
Submission received: 12 June 2024 / Revised: 3 July 2024 / Accepted: 10 July 2024 / Published: 11 July 2024
Download
keyboard_arrow_down




Browse Figures Versions Notes
Abstract
This systematic review assessed to evaluate the potential correlation between oral health and air pollution. To the best of the authors’ knowledge, this is the first systematic review endeavoring to compare air pollution and oral health. A systematic search was performed according to the PRISMA (Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-analyses) statement and employed the PICO(S) approach (Patient or Population, Intervention, Control or Comparison, Outcome, and Study types). The search was limited to English-language articles, and publications within a 15-year timeframe were included in the electronic search. A comprehensive search was conducted across PubMed, Scopus, Embase, and Web of Science databases, spanning the years 2008 to 2023, resulting in a total of 4983 scientific articles. A final selection of 11 scientific papers was made based on their study type and the specific air pollutants examined. The selected papers analyzed various air pollutants associated with health-related diseases, including Ozone, Nitrogen Dioxide, Nitrogen Monoxide, Carbon Monoxide, sulfur dioxide, and particulate matter. Three out of eleven of the reviewed studies assert a strong correlation between air pollutants and oral diseases, specifically periodontitis. However, the exact biological mechanisms underlying this correlation do not seem to be fully understood, indicating the need for further comprehensive investigation in this regard. Dentists can contribute to the collective effort by educating their patients about the oral health implications of air pollution, thereby supporting initiatives aimed at promoting environmental and health sustainability.
Keywords: oral health; air pollution; periodontitis; dentistry; systematic review
1. Introduction
Environmental pollution refers to the release or production of harmful substances or contaminants into the natural environment, such as air, water, or soil, which can have detrimental effects on living organisms and ecosystems. Air pollution, specifically, is a complex mixture of particles and gases that can pose significant risks to human health [1]. It arises from various sources, including industrial emissions, transportation activities, and household practices. The World Health Organization (WHO) estimates that air pollution contributes to approximately 7 million premature deaths worldwide annually [2]. Unfortunately, the European Environment Agency shares this concerning perspective, highlighting the substantial impact of air pollution on the health of the population, particularly in urban areas [3]. Despite notable progress in reducing the emission of primary air pollutants and improving air quality over the past two decades in Europe, thanks in part to the collective efforts toward achieving the 17 Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) by 2030 [4], many regions still face inadequate air quality. In the previous year, air pollution led to a significant number of premature deaths across the 27 EU Member States (EU-27). Exceeding the World Health Organization’s guideline for the inhalation of fine particulate matter with an aerodynamic diameter of ≤2.5 μm (PM2.5) resulted in 238,000 premature deaths, and exposure to nitrogen dioxide (NO2) levels beyond the recommended limit led to 49,000 premature deaths. Additionally, acute exposure to ozone caused 24,000 premature deaths [2,3]. The gravity of the issue is further emphasized when considering the morbidity effects [2,3].
The WHO has identified PM, NO2, sulfur dioxide (SO2), and ground-level ozone (O3) as the air pollutants with the greatest potential to harm human health [2]. These pollutants have been linked to various health complications, including respiratory and cardiovascular diseases, negative birth outcomes, and neurological disorders [1,5,6]. PM, in particular, is considered highly hazardous in air pollution due to its ability to penetrate deep into the lungs, causing inflammation and tissue damage [1]. Nitrogen oxides (NOx) and SO2, among other pollutants, also have detrimental effects on human health [1,7], contributing to respiratory issues, exacerbating cardiovascular diseases, and even increasing the risk of premature mortality. Moreover, long-term exposure to air pollution has been associated with the development of chronic health conditions such as asthma, lung cancer, and heart disease [1,5,7,8]. These chronic illnesses further highlight the serious implications of sustained exposure to air pollutants. The impact of air pollution on health is particularly significant in vulnerable populations, including children, the elderly, and individuals with pre-existing health conditions [8]. Given the substantial effects of air pollution on health, there is a growing imperative for effective policies and interventions aimed at reducing pollution levels and safeguarding public health. Numerous studies have been conducted over the years to investigate the impact of air pollution on health, focusing on the associated risks [5,7,8,9].
However, there is a noticeable lack of research on the correlation between air pollution and oral health-related pathologies. This represents an intriguing finding that warrants further exploration, considering that inhalation and ingestion are the primary routes of exposure to these air pollutants. It is therefore reasonable to assume a close connection between these pollutants and the oral cavity. However, there is currently a dearth of studies, and notably, no systematic review has been conducted on this specific topic. In this context, dentists can contribute to the collective effort by educating their patients about the oral health implications of air pollution, thereby supporting initiatives aimed at promoting environmental and health sustainability. Consequently, the aim of this literature review is to examine the potential relationship between air pollution and oral health. To the best of the authors’ knowledge, this is the first systematic review endeavoring to compare air pollution and oral health.
2. Materials and Methods
2.1. Study Characteristics
The article selection process for this review followed the guidelines provided by the PRISMA flow diagram, as shown in Figure 1. A comprehensive search was conducted across PubMed, Scopus, Embase, and Web of Science databases, spanning 1 January 2008 to 31 December 2023 (a 15-year timeframe was included), resulting in a total of 4983 scientific articles. To eliminate duplicates, the references of the identified records were uploaded to the digital tool Rayyan (http://rayyan.qcri.org, accessed on 23 May 2023). The systematic review is registered in the International Prospective Register of Systematic Reviews, Prospero, under the identification CRD 42024559844. After duplicate removal, 3477 unique papers remained for further analysis. The titles of these articles were manually reviewed to include relevant references related to the correlation between air pollutants and oral health. Following this screening process, 20 studies were identified as relevant to the topic of air pollutants and their impact on oral health. After that, 9 studies were excluded (did not meet our inclusion criteria); a final selection of 11 scientific papers was made based on their study type and the specific air pollutants examined.
Figure 1. PRISMA flow diagram.
2.2. Search Strategy
This systematic review adhered to the guidelines outlined in the PRISMA (Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-analyses) statement and employed the PICO(S) approach (Patient or Population, Intervention, Control or Comparison, Outcome, and Study types). Extensive literature research was conducted using the databases PubMed (Medline), Embase, Web of Knowledge, and Cochrane Library, focusing on the correlation between air pollution and oral health. The search strategy utilized various combinations of keywords, including “Air pollution” OR “environmental” OR “pollution” AND “dental health” OR “oral health”. The PICO question was formulated as follows: P-population: individuals exposed to air pollution; I-intervention: measures undertaken by dental practitioners to comprehend the relationship between air pollution and oral health; C-comparison: no intervention or standard care; and O-outcome: oral health outcomes associated with air pollution such as dental caries, periodontitis, and related conditions. This question specifically investigates the association between air pollution and oral health, as well as the role of dental practitioners in addressing this issue. The search was limited to English-language articles, and publications within a 15-year timeframe were included in the electronic search.
The research questions of this systematic review were:
How many studies have been published on the effects of air pollution on oral health?
What methodological characteristics did the paper publish?
Which air pollutants were commonly investigated?
Is it possible to consider a relation between oral health outcomes and air pollutants?
2.3. Inclusion and Exclusion Criteria
Articles were considered appropriate when satisfying the following inclusion criteria:
Articles with main topic regarding the correlation between air pollution and their impact on oral health;
Studies performed in vivo;
Full-text paper in English;
Retrospective study, case-control study, cross-sectional study were included.
Articles that did not have the above information were excluded from the review. Research letters and conference proceedings were excluded. Air pollutant exposure of workers in dental clinic/hospital were excluded.
2.4. Data Extraction and Analysis of the Data
All the relevant data were extracted, including the author’s name, publication year, type of study, pollutants measured, and country and impact of oral health. Specifically, a data abstraction sheet was used, and the accuracy of the information was verified by both B.S. and M.S. (in accordance with all the authors). The investigated pollutants were classified as follows:
Gaseous/air pollutants (such as O3 = Ozone; NO = Nitrogen Monoxide; NO2 = Nitrogen Dioxide; SO2 = Sulfur Dioxide; CO = Carbon Monoxide) and particulate matter (i.e., PM10, PM2.5).
3. Results
The 11 selected papers analyzed various air pollutants associated with health-related diseases, including Ozone, Nitrogen Dioxide, Nitrogen Monoxide, Carbon Monoxide, sulfur dioxide, and particulate matter. Notably, particulate matter with an aerodynamic diameter of ≤10 μm diameters (PM10) and PM2.5 were included in the analysis, as outlined in Table 1. The studies underwent quality assessment utilizing the QUADAS-2 tool, as outlined in Table 1. All publication were classified as having a high risk of bias (Table 2).
Table 1. Table summarizing the principal results of the study. PM = Particulate Matter; O3 = Ozone; NO = Nitrogen Monoxide; NO2 = Nitrogen Dioxide; SO2 = Sulfur Dioxide; CO = Carbon Monoxide.
Table 2. QUADAS-2 tool quality assessment, ** high risk of BIAS.
How many studies have been published on the effects of air pollution on oral health?
Upon conducting a systematic review, it was found that the initial study exploring the association between oral health and air pollution was published in 2008 in Taiwan. That study specifically investigated the correlation between oral cleft lip, either with or without palate and air pollution. Out of the total of eleven studies reviewed, a significant association between maternal exposure to air pollution and oral clefts was observed in seven studies. However, the primary focus of the authors was to primarily examine pathologies directly related to the oral cavity and within the domain of dental expertise. The first study establishing a relationship between periodontitis and air pollution was published in 2014. Among the eleven studies analyzed, three studies demonstrated an association between periodontitis and air pollution. This finding is summarized in Table 1, indicating an increasing over the past five years in publications suggesting a correlation between periodontitis and air pollution within the last decade. Only one out of the eleven studies reviewed addressed the correlation between oral cancer and air pollution.
What methodological characteristics did the paper publish?
The methodological characteristics are presented in Table 3.
Table 3. Table summarizing the principal results of the study. N.A. = Not applicable; OR = Odds ratio.
Geographical Distribution
Concerning the geographical distribution, data pertaining to the correlation between air pollution and oral health have been published by institutions in various countries across the globe. The studies included in this systematic review specifically originate from Taiwan (n = 4), the United States (n = 3), China (n = 3), and South Korea (n = 1), as illustrated in Figure 2.
Figure 2. Geographic distribution of studies included: Taiwan (n = 4) 37%; United States (n = 3) 27%; China (n = 3) 27%; South Korea (n = 1) 9%.
Which air pollutants were commonly investigated?
The air pollutants investigated in the current study are presented in Table 4.
Table 4. Table summarizing the principal air pollutants investigated.
4. Discussion
Is there a relationship between oral health outcomes and air pollutants?
This systematic review is the first to examine the association between common air pollutants (CO, O3, NO, SO2, and PM) and oral health, highlighting that these pollutants primarily enter the body through inhalation, causing various respiratory and cardiovascular problems [30,31,32,33,34,35,36,37,38,39,40,41,42,43,44]. Notably, particulate matter (PM) can deeply penetrate the lungs and bloodstream, leading to severe health issues like premature death, non-fatal heart attacks, and aggravated asthma [45,46,47,48,49]. The available literature consistently demonstrates that inhalation and ingestion are the primary routes of exposure to air pollutants [46,47,48,49]. As a result, it is reasonable to assume a strong correlation between these pollutants and their impact on the oral cavity. Nevertheless, it is important to note that there is a scarcity of studies specifically focusing on this association, hence the idea to investigate this possible relationships. Three out of eleven studies selected in this review support the existence of an association between oral health and air pollution. In the last 15 years, there was an increase in publications that support this assumption. Specifically, the first study was published in 2014 by Tsung-Han Yang et al., who investigated via a cross-sectional study the association between particulate matter (PM2.5) and high-sensitivity C-reactive protein (hs-CRP), assuming that patients with periodontal diseases had higher CRP levels compared to periodontally healthy subjects. The researchers reached the conclusion that this correlation is feasible since both periodontal diseases and particulate air pollution have been associated with a higher likelihood of experiencing systemic inflammation and oxidative stress. Moreover, they share a common exposure pathway.
Essentially, periodontal inflammation could potentially cause a systemic rise in inflammatory markers, which subsequently amplifies the body’s reaction to particulate air pollution in the lungs. Recently, in 2021, Han Jie-Lin et al. realized a retrospective cohort study using longitudinal generation tracking and the Taiwan air quality-monitoring databases, thus concluding that resident in Taiwan with long-term exposure to higher levels of air pollutants (SO2, CO, NO, NO2, NOx, PM2.5, and PM10) had a greater risk of periodontitis. The authors, however, arrived at a conclusion very similar to that of their predecessors, namely, that the precise mechanisms establishing a connection between periodontitis and air pollution are not yet fully understood, despite extensive research on various air pollutants and their associations with numerous systemic effects. These effects include, among others, increased systemic oxidative stress, increased blood coagulation, and decreased plasma antioxidant capacity [11,50].
In a recently published paper in 2023, Marruganti et al. aimed to further investigate the epidemiological connection between periodontitis and air pollution [10]. They conducted a cross-sectional study in a representative sample of population of South Korea, where they analyzed the average annual levels of PM10, O3, SO2, and NO2. Their findings revealed that even a slight increase in outdoor levels of PM10 and O3 were positively associated with prevalence of periodontitis [10]. On the other hand, NO2 and humidity showed an inverse correlation with periodontitis. The results remained consistent when considering severe cases of periodontitis, showing a similar association with SO2 and NO2. The authors discussed three potential mechanisms that could be associated with periodontitis: inflammation, oxidative stress, and alterations in the microbiome. Specifically, according to this study, the accumulation of particles and components of air pollutants (such iron, copper, and zinc) on the oral mucosa and periodontium can potentially activate comparable inflammatory pathways and induce oxidative stress within the oral cavity [10]. This process mirrors the mechanisms observed in the lungs. At present, however, one fact emerges, namely that, although there is a correlation of some air pollutants, especially particulate matter, with periodontitis, the underlying pathophysiological mechanisms have not yet been explained and clarified. Thus, much more research should be conducted in this regard.
Another finding important to analyze is the correlation between oral cleft and air pollutants, a finding that was common to as many as seven of the eleven articles analyzed, although the main objective of the present systematic review was to investigate the relationship of pollutants with oral diseases. Briefly, orofacial clefts are common congenital malformations generally subdivided into two types: cleft palate only (CPO) and cleft lip with or without cleft palate (CL/P). In a case-control study conducted by Jiang Wen et al. in 2021, it was hypothesized that maternal exposure to CO, NO2, and SO2 during the first trimester of pregnancy could potentially play a role in the occurrence of orofacial clefts. The researchers suggested that these associations might be independent from particulate matter, highlighting the specific focus on these gaseous pollutants in relation to the development of orofacial clefts [12]. In contrast, Liu-fang-Hua’s research in 2020 presented evidence supporting the notion that exposure to PM10 during the three months prior to conception and the first trimester of pregnancy raises the likelihood of developing oral clefts [13]. Several other authors, including Jinzhou Zhao in China and Ying Zhou in the United States, have reported similar associations between PM2.5, PM10, O3, CO, and SO2 exposure and the risk of oral clefts [14]. These studies have shown that PM2.5 significantly increases the risk of cleft palate alone, but does not affect the incidence of cleft lip with or without palate [14]. Additionally, research conducted by Marshall et al. and Tanner in the United States and other studies have found limited and inconsistent evidence linking maternal exposure to ambient air pollutants with cleft malformations [17,19]. However, the majority of the authors reached the consensus that the biological mechanisms responsible for the connections between gaseous air pollutants and orofacial clefts still remain unclear. Some proposed mechanisms include: (1) mutations in fetal DNA that disrupt cellular apoptosis, (2) instances of oxygen deprivation (anoxic events), (3) oxidative damage, and (4) toxicity targeting specific fetal cell populations [51]. In one study out of the eleven, the association between PM2.5 and oral cancer was examined. The authors suggest that elevated levels of PM2.5 might be linked to a higher risk of oral cancer [15]. However, the exact mechanism by which this relationship exists is not fully comprehended, although for some authors the carcinogenicity of PM2.5 has been linked to oxidative DNA damage, metabolism of organic compounds, and inflammatory lesions [52].
Study Limitations
This study has several limitations. Firstly, the exact concentrations of PM10, PM2.5, and other pollutants analyzed, such as CO, SO2, NO2, and O3, are not well specified in every study. As a result, interpreting all the data with absolute clarity becomes challenging. In several selected studies, the levels of air pollutants were assessed using a database that gathers data from air monitoring stations located across the region. In addition, the variations in findings among studies could be attributed, at least in part, to disparities in the levels and ranges of air pollutants. Nevertheless, a substantial portion of the reviewed studies assert a strong correlation between air pollutants and oral diseases, specifically periodontitis. However, the exact biological mechanisms underlying this correlation do not seem to be fully understood, indicating the need for further comprehensive investigation in this regard.
5. Conclusions
In conclusion, this systematic review highlights a potential link between air pollution and oral health, specifically pointing to a significant correlation with periodontitis as evidenced in some studies. However, the limited understanding of the underlying biological mechanisms underscores the necessity for further research to elucidate these connections. By raising awareness and educating patients about the detrimental effects of air pollution on oral health, dentists can help advance public health initiatives.
Author Contributions
Conceptualization, B.S. and S.C.; methodology, M.S. and B.S.; software, E.A., M.S. and P.D.C.; validation, B.S. and P.D.C.; investigation, M.S.; resources, S.C.; data curation, M.S. and E.A.; writing—original draft preparation, M.S. and B.S.; writing—review and editing, P.D.C. and E.A.; visualization, S.C. and B.S.; supervision, B.S.; project administration, B.S. and S.C.; funding acquisition, S.C., P.D.C. and B.S. B.S. and M.S. contributed equally to this work and share first authorship. All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
Funding
Italian Ministry of University and Research (MUR) National Innovation Ecosystem, grant ECS00000041-VITALITY-CUP D73C22000840006.
Conflicts of Interest
The authors declare no conflicts of interests.
Abbreviations
O3 Ozone
NO Nitrogen Monoxide
NO2 Nitrogen Dioxide
SO2 Sulfur Dioxide
CO Carbon Monoxide
PM10,2.5 particulate matter
N.A. Not applicable
References
Manisalidis, I.; Stavropoulou, E.; Stavropoulos, A.; Bezirtzoglou, E. Environmental and Health Impacts of Air Pollution: A Review. Front. Public Health 2020, 20, 8–14. [Google Scholar] [CrossRef] [PubMed]
World Health Organization (WHO). 7 Million Premature Deaths Annually Linked to Air Pollution. 2014. Available online: https://www.who.int/news/item/25-03-2014-7-million-premature-deaths-annually-linked-to-air-pollution (accessed on 23 May 2023).
European Environment Agency (EEA). Air Quality in Europe 2022: Health Impacts of Air Pollution. 2022. Available online: https://www.eea.europa.eu/publications/air-quality-in-europe-2022/health-impacts-of-air-pollution (accessed on 23 May 2023).
Morton, S.; Pencheon, D.; Squires, N. Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), and their implementation: A national global framework for health, development and equity needs a systems approach at every level. Br. Med. Bull. 2017, 124, 81–90. [Google Scholar] [PubMed]
Liu, C.; Yin, P.; Chen, R.; Meng, X.; Wang, L.; Niu, Y.; Lin, Z.; Liu, Y.; Liu, J.; Qi, J.; et al. Ambient carbon monoxide and cardiovascular mortality: A nationwide time-series analysis in 272 cities in China. Lancet Planet Health 2018, 2, e12–e18. [Google Scholar] [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Cori, L.; Donzelli, G.; Gorini, F.; Bianchi, F.; Curzio, O. Risk Perception of Air Pollution: A Systematic Review Focused on Particulate Matter Exposure. Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2020, 17, 6424. [Google Scholar] [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Chen, T.M.; Gokhale, J.; Shofer, S.; Kuschner, W.G. Outdoor air pollution: Nitrogen dioxide, sulfur dioxide, and carbon monoxide health effects. Am. J. Med. Sci. 2007, 333, 249–256. [Google Scholar] [CrossRef] [PubMed]
He, L.; Norris, C.; Cui, X.; Li, Z.; Barkjohn, K.K.; Teng, Y.; Fang, L.; Lin, L.; Wang, Q.; Zhou, X.; et al. Oral cavity response to air pollutant exposure and association with pulmonary inflammation and symptoms in asthmatic children. Environ. Res. 2022, 206, 112275. [Google Scholar] [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Fuller, R.; Landrigan, P.J.; Balakrishnan, K.; Bathan, G.; Bose-O’Reilly, S.; Brauer, M.; Caravanos, J.; Chiles, T.; Cohen, A.; Corra, L.; et al. Pollution and health: A progress update. Lancet Planet Health 2022, 6, e535–e547. [Google Scholar] [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Marruganti, C.; Shin, H.S.; Sim, S.J.; Grandini, S.; Laforí, A.; Romandini, M. Air Pollution as a Risk Indicator for Periodontitis. Biomedicines 2023, 11, 443. [Google Scholar] [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Lin, H.J.; Tsai, S.C.-S.; Lin, F.C.-F.; Hsu, Y.-C.; Chen, S.-W.; Chou, R.-H.; Lin, C.-L.; Hsu, C.Y.; Chang, K.-H. Prolonged Exposure to Air Pollution Increases Periodontal Disease Risk: A Nationwide, Population-Based, Cohort Study. Atmosphere 2021, 12, 1668. [Google Scholar] [CrossRef]
Jiang, W.; Xie, W.; Ni, B.; Zhou, H.; Liu, Z. First trimester exposure to ambient gaseous air pollutants and risk of orofacial clefts: A case–control study in Changsha, China. BMC Oral Health 2021, 21, 530. [Google Scholar] [CrossRef]
Liu, F.H.; Dai, H.X.; Gong, T.T.; Zhang, J.Y.; Li, J.; Chen, Z.J.; Li, L.L.; Chen, Y.L.; Liu, S.; Jiang, C.Z.; et al. Maternal preconception and first trimester exposure to PM10 and the risk of oral clefts in offspring: A population-based, case-control study. Occup. Environ. Med. 2020, 77, 721–727. [Google Scholar] [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Zhao, J.; Zhang, B.; Yang, S.; Mei, H.; Qian, Z.; Liang, S.; Zhang, Y.; Hu, K.; Tan, Y.; Xian, H.; et al. Maternal exposure to ambient air pollutant and risk of oral clefts in Wuhan, China. Environ. Pollut. 2018, 238, 624–630. [Google Scholar] [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Chu, Y.-H.; Kao, S.-W.; Tantoh, D.M. Association between fine particulate matter and oral cancer among Taiwanese men. J. Investig. Med. 2019, 67, 34–38. [Google Scholar] [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Zhou, Y.; Gilboa, S.M.; Herdt, M.L.; Lupo, P.J.; Flanders, W.D.; Liu, Y.; Shin, M.; Canfield, M.A.; Kirby, R.S. Maternal exposure to ozone and PM2.5 and the prevalence of orofacial clefts in four U.S. states. Environ. Res. 2017, 153, 35–40. [Google Scholar] [CrossRef]
Tanner, J.P.; Salemi, J.L.; Stuart, A.L.; Yu, H.; Jordan, M.M.; DuClos, C.; Cavicchia, P.; Correia, J.A.; Watkins, S.M.; Kirby, R.S. Associations between exposure to ambient benzene and PM2.5 during pregnancy and the risk of selected birth defects in offspring. Environ. Res. 2015, 142, 345–353. [Google Scholar] [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Yang, T.H.; Masumi, S.; Weng, S.P.; Chen, H.W.; Chuang, H.C.; Chuang, K.J. Personal exposure to particulate matter and inflammation among patients with periodontal disease. Sci. Total Environ. 2015, 502, 585–589. [Google Scholar] [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Marshall, E.G.; Harris, G.; Wartenberg, D. Oral cleft defects and maternal exposure to ambient air pollutants in New Jersey. Birth Defects Res. A Clin. Mol. Teratol. 2010, 88, 205–215. [Google Scholar] [CrossRef]
Hwang, B.F.; Jaakkola, J.J. Ozone and other air pollutants and the risk of oral clefts. Environ. Health Perspect. 2008, 116, 1411–1415. [Google Scholar] [CrossRef] [PubMed]
European Environment Agency (EEA). Air Pollution Sources. Available online: https://www.eea.europa.eu/themes/air/air-pollution-sources-1 (accessed on 1 October 2023).
Lu, J.G. Air pollution: A systematic review of its psychological, economic, and social effects. Curr. Opin. Psychol. 2020, 32, 52–65. [Google Scholar] [CrossRef]
Kim, K.H.; Kabir, E.; Kabir, S. A review on the human health impact of airborne particulate matter. Environ. Int. 2015, 74, 136–143. [Google Scholar] [CrossRef]
Nuvolone, D.; Petri, D.; Voller, F. The effects of ozone on human health. Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res. Int. 2018, 25, 8074–8088. [Google Scholar] [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Donald, J.A. Subchapter 103B—Carbon Monoxide. In Handbook of Hormones; Takei, Y., Ando, H., Tsutsui, K., Eds.; Academic Press: Cambridge, MA, USA, 2016; pp. 606–607. ISBN 9780128010280. [Google Scholar]
ARPAV. Inquinanti Atmosferici. Agenzia Regionale per la Prevenzione e Protezione Ambientale del Veneto. 2022. Available online: https://www.arpa.veneto.it/temi-ambientali/aria/approfondimenti/inquinanti-atmosferici (accessed on 27 May 2023).
Huang, S.; Li, H.; Wang, M.; Qian, Y.; Steenland, K.; Caudle, W.M.; Liu, Y.; Sarnat, J.; Papatheodorou, S.; Shi, L. Long-term exposure to nitrogen dioxide and mortality: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Sci. Total Environ. 2021, 776, 145968. [Google Scholar] [CrossRef] [PubMed]
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). Basic Information about NO2. EPA Website. Available online: https://www.epa.gov/no2-pollution/basic-information-about-no2 (accessed on 27 September 2023).
Chen, Z.; Liu, N.; Tang, H.; Gao, X.; Zhang, Y.; Kan, H.; Deng, F.; Zhao, B.; Zeng, X.; Sun, Y.; et al. Health effects of exposure to sulfur dioxide, nitrogen dioxide, ozone, and carbon monoxide between 1980 and 2019: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Indoor Air 2022, 32, e13170. [Google Scholar] [CrossRef]
Brook, R.D.; Rajagopalan, S.; Pope, C.A.; Brook, J.R.; Bhatnagar, A.; Diez-Roux, A.V.; Holguin, F.; Hong, Y.; Luepker, R.V.; Mittleman, M.A.; et al. Particulate matter air pollution and cardiovascular disease: An update to the scientific statement from the American Heart Association. Circulation 2010, 121, 2331–2378. [Google Scholar] [CrossRef] [PubMed]
World Health Organization (WHO). World Health Organization Releases New Global Air Pollution Data. Geneva, Switzerland. 2018. Available online: http://www.ccacoalition.org/en/news/world-health-organization-releases-new-global-air-pollution-data (accessed on 27 May 2023).
van Strien, R.T.; Gent, J.F.; Belanger, K.; Triche, E.; Bracken, M.B.; Leaderer, B.P. Exposure to NO2 and nitrous acid and respiratory symptoms in the first year of life. Epidemiology 2004, 15, 471–478. [Google Scholar] [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Smith, B.J.; Nitschke, M.; Pilotto, L.S.; Ruffin, R.E.; Pisaniello, D.L.; Willson, K.J. Health effects of daily indoor nitrogen dioxide exposure in people with asthma. Eur. Respir. J. 2000, 16, 879–885. [Google Scholar] [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Shima, M.; Adachi, M. Effect of outdoor and indoor nitrogen dioxide on respiratory symptoms in schoolchildren. Int. J. Epidemiol. 2000, 29, 862–870. [Google Scholar] [CrossRef]
Morou-Bermúdez, E.; Torres-Colón, J.E.; Bermúdez, N.S.; Patel, R.P.; Joshipura, K.J. Pathways Linking Oral Bacteria, Nitric Oxide Metabolism, and Health. J. Dent. Res. 2022, 101, 623–631. [Google Scholar] [CrossRef]
Barnett, A.G.; Williams, G.M.; Schwartz, J.; Neller, A.H.; Best, T.L.; Petroeschevsky, A.L.; Simpson, R.W. Air pollution and child respiratory health: A case-crossover study in Australia and New Zealand. Am. J. Respir. Crit. Care Med. 2005, 171, 1272–1278. [Google Scholar] [CrossRef]
Koken, P.J.; Piver, W.T.; Ye, F.; Elixhauser, A.; Olsen, L.M.; Portier, C.J. Temperature, air pollution, and hospitalization for cardiovascular diseases among elderly people in Denver. Environ. Health Perspect. 2003, 111, 1312–1317. [Google Scholar] [CrossRef]
Ely, E.W.; Moorehead, B.; Haponik, E.F. Warehouse workers’ headache: Emergency evaluation and management of 30 patients with carbon monoxide poisoning. Am. J. Med. 1995, 98, 145–155. [Google Scholar] [PubMed]
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). Unintentional carbon monoxide poisonings in residential settings—Connecticut, November 1993–March 1994. Morb. Mortal. Wkly. Rep. 1995, 44, 765–767. [Google Scholar] [PubMed]
Téllez, J.; Rodríguez, A.; Fajardo, A. Contaminación por monóxido de carbono: Un problema de salud ambiental [Carbon monoxide contamination: An environmental health problem]. Rev. Salud Pública 2006, 8, 108–117. [Google Scholar] [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Chambers, C.A.; Hopkins, R.O.; Weaver, L.K.; Key, C. Cognitive and affective outcomes of more severe compared to less severe carbon monoxide poisoning. Brain Inj. 2008, 22, 387–395. [Google Scholar] [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Milojevic, A.; Wilkinson, P.; Armstrong, B.; Bhaskaran, K.; Smeeth, L.; Hajat, S. Short-term effects of air pollution on a range of cardiovascular events in England and Wales: Case-crossover analysis of the MINAP database, hospital admissions and mortality. Heart 2014, 100, 1093–1098. [Google Scholar] [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Tsai, S.S.; Huang, C.H.; Goggins, W.B.; Wu, T.N.; Yang, C.Y. Relationship between air pollution and daily mortality in a tropical city: Kaohsiung, Taiwan. J. Toxicol. Environ. Health Part A 2003, 66, 1341–1349. [Google Scholar] [CrossRef]
Hatch, G.E.; Slade, R.; Harris, L.P.; McDonnell, W.F.; Devlin, R.B.; Koren, H.S.; Costa, D.L.; McKee, J. Ozone dose and effect in humans and rats: A comparison using oxygen-18 labeling and bronchoalveolar lavage. Am. J. Respir. Crit. Care Med. 1994, 150, 676–683. [Google Scholar] [CrossRef] [PubMed]
World Health Organization (WHO). Health Risks of Ozone from Long-Range Transboundary Air Pollution. Available online: http://www.euro.who.int/data/assets/pdf_file/0005/78647/E91843.pdf (accessed on 15 August 2019).
Wilson, W.E.; Suh, H.H. Fine particles and coarse particles: Concentration relationships relevant to epidemiologic studies. J. Air Waste Manag. Assoc. 1997, 47, 1238–1249. [Google Scholar] [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Kappos, A.D.; Bruckmann, P.; Eikmann, T.; Englert, N.; Heinrich, U.; Höppe, P.; Koch, E.; Krause, G.H.; Kreyling, W.G.; Rauchfuss, K.; et al. Health effects of particles in ambient air. Int. J. Hyg. Environ. Health 2004, 207, 399–407. [Google Scholar] [CrossRef]
Boschi, N. (Ed.) Defining an educational framework for indoor air sciences education. In Education and Training in Indoor Air Sciences; Springer Science & Business Media: Luxembourg, 2012; 245p. [Google Scholar]
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). Health and Environmental Effects of Particulate Matter (PM). Available online: https://www.epa.gov/pm-pollution/health-and-environmental-effects-particulate-matter-pm (accessed on 23 May 2023).
Brook, R.D.; Bard, R.L.; Morishita, M.; Dvonch, J.T.; Wang, L.; Yang, H.Y.; Spino, C.; Mukherjee, B.; Kaplan, M.J.; Yalavarthi, S.; et al. Hemodynamic, autonomic, and vascular effects of exposure to coarse particulate matter air pollution from a rural location. Environ. Health Perspect. 2014, 122, 624–630. [Google Scholar] [CrossRef]
Rao, A.; Ahmed, M.K.; Taub, P.J.; Mamoun, J.S. The Correlation between Maternal Exposure to Air Pollution and the Risk of Orofacial Clefts in Infants: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis. J. Oral Maxillofac. Res. 2016, 7, e2. [Google Scholar] [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Bernstein, C.R.A.; Nfonsam, V.; Bernstei, H. DNA Damage, DNA Repair and Cancer. In New Research Directions in DNA Repair; IntechOpen: London, UK, 2013. [Google Scholar] [CrossRef]




















































































Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individual author(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to people or property resulting from any ideas, methods, instructions or products referred to in the content.

© 2024 by the authors. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution (CC BY) license (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
Share and Cite
MDPI and ACS Style
Sinjari, B.; Santilli, M.; Di Carlo, P.; Aruffo, E.; Caputi, S. The Correlation between Oral Health and Air Pollution: A Systematic Review. Dent. J. 2024, 12, 215. https://doi.org/10.3390/dj12070215
AMA Style
Sinjari B, Santilli M, Di Carlo P, Aruffo E, Caputi S. The Correlation between Oral Health and Air Pollution: A Systematic Review. Dentistry Journal. 2024; 12(7):215. https://doi.org/10.3390/dj12070215
Chicago/Turabian Style
Sinjari, Bruna, Manlio Santilli, Piero Di Carlo, Eleonora Aruffo, and Sergio Caputi. 2024. "The Correlation between Oral Health and Air Pollution: A Systematic Review" Dentistry Journal 12, no. 7: 215. https://doi.org/10.3390/dj12070215
Note that from the first issue of 2016, this journal uses article numbers instead of page numbers. See further details here.
Article Metrics
Citations
No citations were found for this article, but you may check on Google Scholar
Article Access Statistics
Article access statisticsArticle Views11. Jul12. Jul13. Jul14. Jul15. Jul16. Jul17. Jul18. Jul19. Jul0100200300400500
For more information on the journal statistics, click here.
Multiple requests from the same IP address are counted as one view.


Dent. J., EISSN 2304-6767, Published by MDPI
RSS Content Alert
Further Information
Article Processing Charges
Pay an Invoice
Open Access Policy
Contact MDPI
Jobs at MDPI
Guidelines
For Authors
For Reviewers
For Editors
For Librarians
For Publishers
For Societies
For Conference Organizers
MDPI Initiatives
Sciforum
MDPI Books
Preprints.org
Scilit
SciProfiles
Encyclopedia
JAMS
Proceedings Series
Follow MDPI
LinkedIn
Facebook
Twitter
Subscribe to receive issue release notifications and newsletters from MDPI journals
Select options
Subscribe
© 1996-2024 MDPI (Basel, Switzerland) unless otherwise stated
Disclaimer Terms and Conditions Privacy Policy