Browse
Search
Publish
Login  |  Register
Home All Journals Ozone: Science & Engineering List of Issues Latest Articles Research on Ozone-Enhanced Oxidation of ....
Search in:
This Journal
Anywhere
Advanced search
Ozone: Science & Engineering
The Journal of the International Ozone Association
Latest Articles
Submit an article Journal homepage
0
Views
0
CrossRef citations to date
0
Altmetric
Research Article
Research on Ozone-Enhanced Oxidation of Industrial Zinc Sulfite from Flue Gas Desulfurization
Xiaoyu Chen
& Hua Tong
Received 29 Feb 2024, Accepted 06 Jun 2024, Published online: 14 Jul 2024
Cite this article https://doi.org/10.1080/01919512.2024.2376770
  Full Article Figures & data References Citations Metrics Reprints & Permissions Read this article
ABSTRACT
This study investigates the air oxidation and ozone-enhanced oxidation of zinc sulfite. Zinc sulfite was prepared by reacting pure or industrial zinc oxide with SO2 in water. The oxidation experiments were conducted under constant temperature conditions, with slurry, oxygen, and ozone concentrations in the ranges of 0.5–4%, 10–60%, and 1100–1920 ppm, respectively. The experiments involved determining the zinc ion concentration, sulfite concentration, dissolved oxygen, ozone concentration in the exhaust gas, and total organic carbon value for analysis of the oxidation process. The findings revealed that the mass transfer rate of O2 and/or O3 determined the reaction rate in the main stage of the oxidation process, while ozone affected the non-mass transfer control stage, resulting in an average enhancement of 15% in the oxidation rate. Furthermore, ozone causes organic matter attached to industrial zinc sulfite particles to fall off into the solution, significantly improving the oxidation ratio of industrial zinc sulfite.
KEYWORDS: Controlling step analysisoxidation rateozoneTOCzinc sulfite
Acknowledgments
Thanks to the support of Beijing University of Chemical Technology, and Mr. Tong Hua’s guidance.
Disclosure statement
No potential conflict of interest was reported by the author(s).
Data availability statement
The authors confirm that the data supporting the findings of this study are available within the article [and/or] its supplementary materials.
Author contributions
The experimental operation and data processing of this study were done by Chen Xiaoyu, and the experimental conceptualization, discussion and analysis as well as line revision were done by Chen Xiaoyu and Tong Hua.
Additional information
Funding
This study was supported by Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities of Beijing University of Chemical Technology.
Related research

Recommended articles
Cited by
Food Industrial Effluent Treatment with Oxygen and Ozone Using Activated Carbon for Catalytic Oxidation
Mariela Vega-Álvarez et al.
Ozone: Science & Engineering
Published online: 22 Nov 2023
Effect of Residence Time on Desulfurization and Denitration by the Semi-Dry Ozone Injection Reactor
Tomoyuki Kuroki et al.
Ozone: Science & Engineering
Published online: 3 Apr 2024
Kinetic modeling of advanced starch oxidation with ozone in basic solutions
Alejandro Ávila-Sierra et al.
Ozone: Science & Engineering
Published online: 17 Feb 2023
View more
Information for
Authors
R&D professionals
Editors
Librarians
Societies
Open access
Overview
Open journals
Open Select
Dove Medical Press
F1000Research
Opportunities
Reprints and e-prints
Advertising solutions
Accelerated publication
Corporate access solutions
Help and information
Help and contact
Newsroom
All journals
Books
Keep up to date
Register to receive personalised research and resources by email
Sign me up
Copyright © 2024Informa UK Limited Privacy policy Cookies Terms & conditions Accessibility
Registered in England & Wales No. 3099067
5 Howick Place | London | SW1P 1WG




Cookies Button
We Care About Your Privacy
We and our 842 partners store and/or access information on a device, such as unique IDs in cookies to process personal data. You may accept or manage your choices by clicking below, including your right to object where legitimate interest is used, or at any time in the privacy policy page. These choices will be signaled to our partners and will not affect browsing data.Privacy Policy
We and our partners process data to provide:
Use precise geolocation data. Actively scan device characteristics for identification. Store and/or access information on a device. Personalised advertising and content, advertising and content measurement, audience research and services development.
List of Partners (vendors)
I Accept
Essential Only
Show Purposes