归来庄金矿氰化尾矿浆臭氧除氰试验研究及生产实践.
Source: Gold (1001-1277) . Jun2024, Vol. 45 Issue 6, p101-104. 4p.
Author(s): 付玉平; 郭兆松
Abstract: A study on detoxifying, with ozone, the cyanide tailings slurry generated in the all-sliming cyanidation CIP process at Guilaizhuang Gold Mine was conducted. The results show that under the conditions of pH 11.52 and ozone concentration of 7.14 g/m³ with the addition of 0.357 g/L, after 2 h of oxidation reaction, the mass concentration of total cyanide compounds in the leachate of the filter-press cake was reduced to 2. 13 mg/L. In industrial production practice, the cyanide tailings slurry detoxification process with ozone mainly consists of feed slurry buffering, oxidation reaction, and stabilization treatment. The cyanide removal effect is good, with an ore treatment cost of 6.00 yuan/t, and no introduction of other interfering ions. The cyanide residue meets the standards for the disposal and pollution control in tailings dam in HJ 943-2018 "Technical specification for pollution control of cyanide leaching residue in gold industry".
(Chinese). (English) Copyright of Gold (1001-1277) is the property of Gold Magazine Editorial Office and its content may not be copied or emailed to multiple sites or posted to a listserv without the copyright holder's express written permission. However, users may print, download, or email articles for individual use. This abstract may be abridged. No warranty is given about the accuracy of the copy. Users should refer to the original published version of the material for the full abstract.
For access to this entire article and additional high quality information, please check with your college/university library, local public library, or affiliated institution.
Important User Information: Remote access to EBSCO's databases is permitted to patrons of subscribing institutions accessing from remote locations for personal, non-commercial use. However, remote access to EBSCO's databases from non-subscribing institutions is not allowed if the purpose of the use is for commercial gain through cost reduction or avoidance for a non-subscribing institution.
Privacy Policy A/B Testing Terms of Use Copyright Cookie Policy
© 2024 EBSCO Industries, Inc. All rights reserved.