This website utilizes technologies such as cookies to enable essential site functionality, as well as for analytics, personalization, and targeted advertising. You may change your settings at any time or accept the default settings. You may close this banner to continue with only essential cookies. Privacy Policy
Manage Preferences
Accept All
Reject All
We are aware of an issue impacting some readers trying to access content via their library’s proxy service. We are working to resolve this as soon as possible and apologize for any inconvenience.
Search within
Login / Register
JOURNALS
BOOKS
Journal of Food Processing and Preservation
Original Article
Efficacy of Ozone Treatment on Mycotoxins and Fungal Reduction in Artificially Contaminated Soft Wheat Grains
F.M. Trombete, 
Y.D. Porto, 
O. Freitas-Silva, 
R.V. Pereira, 
G.M. Direito, 
T. Saldanha, 
M.E. Fraga
First published: 07 June 2016 https://doi.org/10.1111/jfpp.12927Citations: 54
Read the full text
PDF
TOOLS
SHARE
Abstract
The effects of O3 concentration, exposure time and grain mass were evaluated on the levels of deoxynivalenol, aflatoxins and total fungal count (TFC) in wheat grains, using a full 23 factorial design. Grain samples were contaminated with fungal conidia and spiked with mycotoxins standards and then submitted to ozonation treatments. The most significant reductions obtained for deoxynivalenol and total aflatoxins corresponded to 64.3 and 48.0%, respectively. TFC reduced approximately 3.0 cycles log cfu/g of wheat grain. O3 concentration and exposure time influenced (P < 0.05) positively the reductions of both mycotoxins and TFC, while the grain mass had a negative effect on both responses. The most significant reduction in TFC and mycotoxin levels was achieved by using 60 mg/L of O3 for 300 min, with 2 kg samples. Gaseous O3 can be considered an excellent method for remediation of these contaminants.
Practical Applications
Gaseous ozonation is an interesting nonthermal technology that can be applied to reduce fungal and mycotoxin contamination in wheat grains (Triticum aestivum L.). The O3 concentration and exposure time positively influence reductions in mycotoxins and fungi count, while grain mass has a negative effect on both variables. Using 60 mg/L of O3 at 300 min of exposure and 2 kg grain samples (11.3% moisture content) is possible to obtain reductions of 3.0 cycles log cfu/g in total fungal count, 64.3% in DON levels and 48.0% in total aflatoxin levels. Data found in this research should contribute in greater interest of ozonation by the food industry and consequently a wider popularization of ozonized products by consumers.
References
Citing Literature
References
Related
Information
Download PDF
© 2024 Institute of Food Science & Technology
Additional links
ABOUT WILEY ONLINE LIBRARY
Privacy Policy
Terms of Use
About Cookies
Manage Cookies
Accessibility
Wiley Research DE&I Statement and Publishing Policies
HELP & SUPPORT
Contact Us
Training and Support
DMCA & Reporting Piracy
OPPORTUNITIES
Subscription Agents
Advertisers & Corporate Partners
CONNECT WITH WILEY
The Wiley Network
Wiley Press Room
Copyright © 1999-2024 John Wiley & Sons, Inc or related companies. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence technologies or similar technologies.