Product & Services
Subscribe
Submit a paper
Browse
Rankings
Blog↗
Contact
Create account
Sign in
  This is a preprint article, it offers immediate access but has not been peer reviewed.
Download This Paper
Open PDF in Browser
Add Paper to My Library
Share:
Effects of Elevated Ozone, Warming, and Their Interactions on the Stem Lodging Resistance of Rice Under Fully Open-Field Conditions
23 Pages Posted: 9 Jul 2024
Zaisheng Shao
Yangzhou University
Lianxin Yang
Yangzhou University
Longxin He
Nanjing University of Information Science and Technology
Yansen Xu
Nanjing University of Information Science and Technology
Bo Shang
Nanjing University of Information Science and Technology
Zhaozhong Feng
Nanjing University of Information Science & Technology (NUIST)
Abstract
Global climate change is characterized by the two most critical characteristics: rising ground-level ozone (O3) concentrations and air temperatures. The goal of this study was to thoroughly examine the interactive effects of these two environmental factors on the rice stem’s lodging resistance. The O3-Temperature-Free Air Enrichment (O3-T-FACE) facility was used to cultivate a high-yield and high-quality japonica rice (Oryza sativa L.), Nanjing 9108. The experiment involved two levels of O3 exposure (A-O3, ambient O3 concentration; E-O3, 1.5 times ambient O3 concentration) and two temperature treatments (CK, ambient temperature; WT, all time warming treatment (CK + 2 °C)) in a field experiment. The study examined the impacts of warming and elevated O3 concentration on the rice stem’s lodging resistance characteristics. The findings indicated a decreasing trend in the stem height, tiller number, and panicle weight per stem of rice under E-O3. E-O3 resulted in a substantial reduction in the pushing resistance of rice at harvest as 32% and 18% in intact plants and single stems, respectively. Almost all of the determined parameters for the basal internode traits, including breaking resistance, bending moment, culm wall thickness, cross-sectional area, and dry weight per unit length, were decreased under E-O3. The changes in the aforementioned parameters caused by E-O3 became less significant or even slightly increased under warming conditions. WT had no discernible influence on the quantity of tillers, however, it significantly decreased the stem height (-12%) and single panicle weight (-22%) of rice. The in situ pushing resistance as well as the basal internode breaking resistance was significantly increased (over 20%) by WT, resulting in a significant decrease in the basal internodes lodging index (-40%). This was primarily demonstrated by the shortening of the internode length, and the significant increases in the dry weight per unit length, cross-sectional area, and culm wall thickness of the basal internodes under the warming conditions. The results suggested that the rice stem’s lodging resistance was substantially decreased by E-O3, whereas WT partially mitigated the O3-induced negative effects. This can be ascribed to the plant’s relatively low gravity center and the reduced load imposed on the basal internodes, as evidenced by significant decreases in the stem height (basal internodes length) and panicle weight per stem under WT.
Keywords: rice, elevated ozone, warming, lodging
Suggested Citation:
Shao, Zaisheng and Yang, Lianxin and He, Longxin and Xu, Yansen and Shang, Bo and Feng, Zhaozhong, Effects of Elevated Ozone, Warming, and Their Interactions on the Stem Lodging Resistance of Rice Under Fully Open-Field Conditions. Available at SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4889333 or http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.4889333














Download This Paper
Open PDF in Browser
55 References
E Agathokleous , M Frei , O M Knopf , O Muller , Y S Xu , T H Nguyen , T Gaiser , X Y Liu , B Liu , C J Saitanis , B Shang , M S Alam , Y R Feng , F Ewert , Z Z Feng
Adapting crop production to climate change and air pollution at different scales , volume 4 , p. 854 - 865 Posted: 2023
E Agathokleous , Z Z Feng , E Oksanen , P Sicard , E Paoletti
Ozone affects plant, insect, and soil microbial communities: a threat to terrestrial ecosystems and biodiversity
Sci. Adv , volume 6 Posted: 2020
E A Ainsworth
Rice production in a changing climate: a meta-analysis of responses to elevated carbon dioxide and elevated ozone concentration
Glob. Change Biol , volume 14 , p. 1642 - 1650 Posted: 2008
K Burkey , R Tisdale , R Zobel , S Ray , W Pursley
Interactive effects of elevated ozone and temperature on growth and yield of soybean (Glycine max (L.) Merr.) under field conditions , volume 10 Posted: 2020
Load more
0 Citations
Do you have a job opening that you would like to promote on SSRN?
Place Job Opening
Paper statistics
DOWNLOADS
3
ABSTRACT VIEWS
22
55 References
PlumX Metrics
Related eJournals
Agronomy & Soil Science eJournal
Follow
Feedback
Submit a Paper
Section 508 Text Only Pages
SSRN Quick Links
SSRN Solutions
Research Paper Series
Conference Papers
Partners in Publishing
Jobs & Announcements
Special Topic Hubs
SSRN Rankings
Top Papers
Top Authors
Top Organizations
About SSRN
Network Directors
Announcements
Contact us
FAQs
Copyright Terms and Conditions Privacy Policy
All content on this site: Copyright © 2023 Elsevier Inc., its licensors, and contributors. All rights are reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. For all open access content, the Creative Commons licensing terms apply.
We use cookies to help provide and enhance our service and tailor content.
To learn more, visit Cookie Settings.
We use cookies that are necessary to make our site work. We may also use additional cookies to analyze, improve, and personalize our content and your digital experience. For more information, see ourCookie Policy
Cookie Settings
Accept all cookies