Skip to main navigation
Skip to search
Skip to main content
University of Bristol Home
Help & Terms of Use
Home
Profiles
Research units
Research Outputs
Projects
Student theses
Search by expertise, name or affiliation
Photochemical Ozone Creation Potential
Rayne E T Holland, M. A. H. Khan, Dudley E Shallcross
School of ChemistryCabot Institute for the EnvironmentAtmospheric Chemistry
Research output: Chapter in Book/Report/Conference proceeding › Chapter in a book
Overview
Fingerprint
Abstract
Tropospheric ozone (O3) is a significant air pollutant with detrimental effects on human health, plant life, and climate. Its formation involves complex photochemical reactions primarily driven by precursor gases such as oxides of nitrogen (NOx) and volatile organic compounds (VOCs). This chapter provides an overview of the chemistry behind tropospheric O3 formation, focusing on the role of VOCs. An important method for quantifying the ozone formation potential of VOCs – Photochemical Ozone Creation Potential (POCP) – is explained and compared with alternate methods such as Maximum Incremental Reactivity (MIR), and Propene-Equivalent O3 formation weightings. Understanding the mechanisms and quantification of O3 formation is crucial for developing effective strategies to mitigate its adverse impacts on air quality and human health.
Original language
English
Title of host publication
Reference Module in Chemistry, Molecular Sciences and Chemical Engineering
Subtitle of host publication
Encyclopedia of Green Chemistry
Editors
Béla Török
Publisher
Elsevier
ISBN (Electronic)
978-0-12-409547-2
Publication status
Published - 7 Jul 2024
UN SDGs
This output contributes to the following UN Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs)
Access to Document
10.1016/B978-0-443-15742-4.00067-3
Handle.net
Persistent link
Fingerprint
Dive into the research topics of 'Photochemical Ozone Creation Potential'. Together they form a unique fingerprint.
Volatile Organic Compound
Earth and Planetary Sciences
100%
Propene
Biochemistry, Genetics and Molecular Biology
100%
Human Health
Earth and Planetary Sciences
66%
Plant Life
Earth and Planetary Sciences
33%
Photochemical Reaction
Earth and Planetary Sciences
33%
Tropospheric Ozone
Earth and Planetary Sciences
33%
Air Pollutant
Earth and Planetary Sciences
33%
Air Quality
Earth and Planetary Sciences
33%
View full fingerprint
Cite this
APA
Author
BIBTEX
Harvard
Standard
RIS
Vancouver
Holland, R. E. T., Khan, M. A. H., & Shallcross, D. E. (2024). Photochemical Ozone Creation Potential. In B. Török (Ed.), Reference Module in Chemistry, Molecular Sciences and Chemical Engineering: Encyclopedia of Green Chemistry Elsevier. https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-443-15742-4.00067-3

Powered by Pure, Scopus & Elsevier Fingerprint Engine™
All content on this site: Copyright © 2024 Elsevier B.V. or its licensors and contributors. All rights are reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. For all open access content, the Creative Commons licensing terms apply
We use cookies to help provide and enhance our service and tailor content. By continuing you agree to the use of cookies
Cookies Settings
Log in to Pure
University of Bristol data protection policy
About web accessibility
Report vulnerability
We use cookies to analyse and improve our service.Cookie Policy
Cookies Settings
Reject All
Accept All Cookies