We are aware of an issue impacting some readers trying to access content via their library’s proxy service. We are working to resolve this as soon as possible and apologize for any inconvenience.
Search within
Login / Register
Food Frontiers
REVIEW ARTICLE
Open Access
Roles of non-visible light and temperature in the regulation of anthocyanin synthesis in fruits and vegetables
Haining Yin, 
Lin Wang, 
Yanjun Wu, 
Zhumei Xi
First published: 20 June 2024 https://doi.org/10.1002/fft2.426
SECTIONS
PDF
TOOLS
SHARE
Abstract
The depletion of the ozone layer creates a gate for non-visible spectra to impact the Earth's surface and interfere with fruit and vegetable growth and developments by affecting their morphology and physiology. The potential contribution of visible light to photosynthetic activity has received significant attention, particularly blue and red/far-red light in the visible spectrum. However, plants are also inevitably exposed to relatively high doses of non-visible spectra, including ultraviolet (UV) and infrared (IR) radiation. This review examines the literature on the impact of such non-visible spectra on fruit and vegetable growth and development. The accumulation of radiation-absorbing compounds is a primary mechanism of acclimation to changing radiation levels. Anthocyanins are compounds that exhibit high sensitivity to UV and IR radiation as well as temperature variations, playing a crucial protective role against detrimental radiation in plants. Current research helps to elucidate the involvement of low and high temperatures in the control of UVB-induced anthocyanin accumulation. Different UV radiation types have been shown to affect fruit and vegetable growth and pigment content differentially. Recent studies have also revealed that IR radiation increases anthocyanin content. Furthermore, specific non-visible spectra mitigate the inhibitory effect of high and low temperature stress on anthocyanin accumulation in fruits and vegetables. These findings have important implications for the horticultural industry, as they suggest that the application of specific of non-visible light spectra could be a promising approach to increasing the nutritional value and marketability of fruits and vegetables.
1 INTRODUCTION
The light environment is crucial for plant growth and development, especially the synthesis and accumulation of anthocyanins, which are affected by spectral components and light intensity (Blancquaert et al., 2019a). Decreases in the ozone layer have led to increased ultraviolet (UV) and infrared (IR) radiation received by plants. The selective absorption of red and blue light by the leaf canopies and the selective transmission of IR and UV radiation enrich the UV and IR radiation in the light environment of the plant. In addition, high-altitude planting areas characterized by high intensity and high proportion of non-visible light wavelengths are increasing, and the prominent color characteristics of the fruits in these areas have already attracted the interest of plant researchers (Mansour et al., 2022). Although there have been reports on the impact of the light environment on anthocyanin biosynthesis in fruits and vegetables, they are mainly focused on the influence of visible light and its underlying mechanisms. In contrast, relevant research on the response mechanism to non-visible light, especially IR radiation, is still relatively scarce. Therefore, in-depth systematic research on the regulatory mechanisms of non-visible light affecting the synthesis and accumulation of anthocyanins is of great significance for adjusting the plant light environment and improving fruit quality.
The color of vegetables and fruits is an important quality indicator, determined by the presence and concentration of specific anthocyanin compounds. Anthocyanin biosynthesis and accumulation are influenced by various environmental factors, among which light and temperature factors play instrumental roles (Liu et al., 2018; Martinez-Luescher et al., 2016). High light intensity, blue/UV light, and low temperature can be applied to promote anthocyanin production in Solanaceous vegetables (Liu et al., 2018). Visible light is mainly involved in photosynthesis, whereas non-visible light plays key roles in the synthesis and accumulation of phenolic compounds, especially anthocyanins (Fernandes De Oliveira & Nieddu, 2016). This review focuses on UV and IR radiation, and by assessing blocking and artificial irradiation experiments, it aims to elucidate the promoting effect of non-visible light on anthocyanin biosynthesis and accumulation in fruits. Moreover, it demonstrates that different non-visible light intensities can alleviate the inhibitory effect of low temperature and high temperature stress on the synthesis of anthocyanins. Transcriptome and metabolome analysis revealed that UVA and IR radiation significantly induce genes related to the flavonoid synthesis pathway and metabolites, promoting the synthesis of anthocyanins (Yin, Wang, Wang, et al., 2022; Yin, Wang, & Xi, 2022).
2 THE CHARACTERISTICS OF NON-VISIBLE SPECTRA
Light, in the form of electromagnetic waves, is the radiant energy emitted by the sun and projected onto the Earth. Its wavelength can range from 100 nm, corresponding to X-rays, to 100 m, corresponding to radio waves (Maverakis et al., 2010). The wavelength range of solar radiation reaching the Earth's surface is 280–2500 nm. However, wavelengths shorter than 280 nm and longer than 2500 nm are absorbed by atmospheric molecules such as ozone and water vapor and cannot reach the ground (Maverakis et al., 2010). The solar radiation absorbed by the ground is reflected back into space as thermal energy, with a proportion of it being blocked by greenhouse gases and reflected back to the ground (Figure 1). The wavelength range of the light spectrum and the respective plant photoreceptors or photosynthetic pigments are shown in Figure 1. Most studies on solar radiation have focused solely on photosynthetically active radiation (PAR), with limited research conducted on non-visible spectra such as UV and IR radiation. UV radiation, which is divided into three types based on wavelength [UVC (100–280 nm), UVB (280–320 nm), and UVA (320–400 nm)], is mainly absorbed by the stratospheric ozone layer (Semenova et al., 2022; Yang et al., 2018). However, UVA and a small portion of UVB can reach the Earth's surface and be absorbed by plants (Loconsole & Santamaria, 2021). UVA radiation accounts for approximately 95% of the UV radiation reaching the Earth's surface (Rai et al., 2021). When harvesting light, plants’ photosynthetic organs are inevitably exposed to relatively high dose of non-visible spectra, including UV and IR radiation (Koyama et al., 2012). Plants can also sense short-wavelength spectra, including UVA and UVB, in addition to the blue and red/far-red light in the visible spectra (Xu & Zhu, 2020). Because of the high diffusive capacity of the UVB radiation, the UVB/PAR ratio is significantly lower on the plant canopy parts exposed to full sunlight than on those in the shade. Furthermore, the long-wavelength spectra of near IR radiation (800–2000 nm) are transmitted (less than 50%), reflected (more than 40%), and absorbed (approximately 10%) by plant leaves. These non-visible spectra play a significant role in plant growth and development.
FIGURE 1
Open in figure viewer
PowerPoint
The light spectrum wavelength range and the respective plant photoreceptors or photosynthetic pigments. UVB photoreceptor UVR8, blue light receptor CRY1, red light receptor phyA/phyB, and far-red light receptor phyA (Luo & Shi, 2019; Verdaguer et al., 2017).
2.1 Photosynthetic pigments
When green photosynthetic plants are subjected to visible radiation with wavelengths corresponding to the absorption spectra of chlorophyll, carotenoids, and phytochromes, they demonstrate unique bioelectric responses (Mironova & Romanovski, 2001). The pigment chlorophyll plays a crucial role in photosynthesis. Previously, only four types of chlorophyll were known—chlorophyll a, b, c, and d. Chlorophyll a is present in all plants, whereas chlorophyll b is mainly found in higher plants. Both of them can only absorb visible light at 400–700 nm, with the strongest absorption capacity at 640–660 and 430–450 nm (Figure 1). Chlorophyll d has a unique absorption peak in the 710 nm IR region and is exclusively discovered in acaryochloris. In 2010, Chen et al. (2010) reported the discovery of chlorophyll f in cyanobacteria, which has an absorption maximum at 706 nm and fluorescence at 722 nm, determined under in vitro conditions. Further studies revealed that charge separation in photosystem (PS) I and II uses chlorophyll f at 745 nm and chlorophyll f (or d) at 727 nm, respectively (Nürnberg et al., 2018). Additionally, chlorophyll f in the PS is advantageous in environments enriched in far-red light (Mascoli et al., 2020). These findings indicate that photosynthesis can be extended further into the IR region. Photosynthesis in plants can increase the accumulation of sugars, which are important precursor substances for synthesizing anthocyanins (Yan et al., 2023; Yin et al., 2024). There is a close relationship between sugars and anthocyanin synthesis (Yin et al., 2024).
2.2 Photoreceptors
According to the current scientific findings, more than three distinct types of light receptors have been identified and characterized. These include phytochromes (phyA and phyB), which are capable of absorbing both red and far-red light; cryptochromes (CRY1), which are responsive to UVA and blue light; and the recently identified UVR8 receptor, which is specifically activated by UVB radiation (Figure 1) (Yang et al., 2018; Zhang et al., 2021). Phytochromes are present in two different forms, Pr (red-light-absorbing phytochrome) and Pfr (far-red-light-absorbing phytochrome), that are photo-interconvertible depending on the light conditions present (Cho et al., 2003). In plant tissues not previously exposed to UVB, UV RESISTANCE LOCUS 8 (UVR8) proteins are present as homodimers, but upon exposure to UVB radiation, they rapidly dissociate into monomerize (Fernández-Milmanda & Ballaré, 2021). Recent research has indicated that UVR8 receptors may be involved in the perception of both UVB and short-wavelength UVA (UVASW315–350 nm) radiation (Rai et al., 2021). UVR8 and cryptochromes have also been demonstrated to function together to regulate gene expression, altering plant cells’ relative sensitivity to UVB, UVA, and blue wavelengths through their interactions (Rai et al., 2021). These findings suggest that different light receptors may be involved in distinct plant regulatory mechanisms under varying UVA and UVB radiation conditions.
2.3 Plant responses to non-visible spectra
Due to global climate change, it has been projected that increased UV radiation is going to be a significant environmental stressor (Smith, 2023). The depletion of stratospheric ozone associated with climate change has led to elevated levels of UV radiation reaching the Earth's surface (Bernhard et al., 2023). Both UVA and UVB radiation, natural components of solar radiation, can cause plant stress and trigger various acclimatory responses mediated by photoreceptors (Badmus et al., 2022). The rapid modulation of UV shielding in plants is influenced by solar UV radiation and is linked to changes in flavonoid biosynthesis and accumulation (Barnes, Tobler, et al., 2016). The activation of phytochromes and cryptochromes in berries promotes the accumulation of flavonoid and non-flavonoid compounds, such as anthocyanins, flavonols, flavanols, phenolic acids, and stilbenes (Veronica Gonzalez et al., 2015). Flavonoids, widely abundant plant secondary metabolites involved in several biological functions, preferentially accumulate in response to UV exposure and are involved directly in UV absorption and possess antioxidant activity (Jaakola & Hohtola, 2010; Neugart et al., 2021). Although solar UV radiation exclusion did not impact proanthocyanidin concentration and composition, it significantly reduced flavonol concentration (Koyama et al., 2012). Furthermore, exposure to UV radiation did not affect ovule production or seed set per flower but decreased pollen production and total seed production per plant by 31% and 69%, respectively (Carlos Del Valle et al., 2020). The Okra (Abelmoschus esculentus) diurnal rhythms were shown to be regulated by UV radiation, resulting in up to a 50% increase (full UV condition compared to UV-excluding condition) in flavonoid content (Neugart et al., 2021). In addition, although high doses of UV radiation are known to reduce yield and quality parameters, low doses of UV may stimulate biomass accumulation and the synthesis of protective compounds that mainly absorb UV (Loconsole & Santamaria, 2021). Therefore, plants can respond and adapt to non-visible spectra through photosynthetic pigments and photoreceptors to control flavonoid synthesis.
3 ANTHOCYANIN METABOLISM
Fruit skin pigmentation is determined by the amount and composition of anthocyanins produced in the cytoplasm and stored in vacuoles as anthocyanin vacuolar inclusions (Azuma, 2018; Flamini et al., 2013). Anthocyanin biosynthesis occurs through the flavonoid biosynthesis pathways, with shared enzymatic steps for the biosynthesis of proanthocyanidins and flavonol derivatives (Sun et al., 2020). Anthocyanin biosynthesis can be divided into three stages: the initial stage involving the phenylpropanoid pathway, the middle stage involving the flavonoid pathway, and the final stage involving the anthocyanin pathway (Figure 2). The mechanisms of anthocyanin biosynthesis and transport in conjunction with photodamage and photoprotection in plants are shown in Figure 2. Initially, glycosides from dihydric anthocyanins, such as cyanidin and peonidin,