Product & Services
Subscribe
Submit a paper
Browse
Rankings
Blog↗
Contact
Create account
Sign in
  This is a preprint article, it offers immediate access but has not been peer reviewed.
Download This Paper
Open PDF in Browser
Add Paper to My Library
Share:
Unravelling the Inconsistency in Organic Matter Removal and Membrane Fouling Control in Leather Mixed Wastewater Treated by Different O3-Aops
31 Pages Posted: 18 Jun 2024
Xiao-Xu Gao
affiliation not provided to SSRN
Ye-Chen An
Harbin Institute of Technology
Yun-Wen Wang
affiliation not provided to SSRN
Rui-Yun Ren
Harbin Institute of Technology
Zhineng Hao
Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS)
Jinglong Han
Harbin Institute of Technology
Jingfu Liu
Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS) - State Key Laboratory of Environmental Chemistry and Ecotoxicology
Aijie Wang
Harbin Institute of Technology
Huangzhao Wei
Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS) - Dalian Institute of Chemical Physics
Xue-Zhi Zhao
affiliation not provided to SSRN
Nanqi Ren
Harbin Institute of Technology - State Key Laboratory of Urban Water Resource and Environment
Abstract
The advanced treatment of dissolved organic matter (DOM) is an important prerequisite for wastewater recycling and membrane filtration water regeneration. Ozone-based advanced oxidation processes (O3-AOPs) are widely used for the removal of DOM and the control of membrane fouling. However, processes and mechanisms of DOM removal and membrane fouling control for different O3-AOPs remain unclear and require further investigation. In this study, the leather industry secondary effluent was treated using O3-AOPs, and the DOM transformation during the treatment and its effect on membrane fouling were explored by combining Fourier transform ion cyclotron resonance mass spectrometry (FT-ICR MS) with multiple analytical techniques. The O3/UV/H2O2, O3/H2O2 and O3/UV achieved effective DOM removal resulting in dissolved organic carbon (DOC) reduction from 14.0 mg/L to 6.8, 7.7 and 8.8 mg/L, respectively, and a preferential removal of lignin-like and humic-like substances. Membrane filtration test revealed that O3/UV exhibited the highest potential for alleviating nanofiltration membrane fouling compared to the other processes. FT-ICR MS showed that it facilitates the removal of aromatic and protein-like compounds, and enhances the oxygen content of the effluent. The fouling layer exhibited the lowest proportion of -COOH groups, a key factor in the formation of the gel layer. DOM was mainly concentrated in the low O/C region and composed of aliphatic compounds in O3/H2O2 effluent. Although O3/UV/H2O2 is effective in reducing DOM, it may induce problems associated with inorganic matter. This study provides new perspectives and mechanism analysis for advanced treatment and membrane fouling control of leather industry secondary effluent.
Keywords: Dissolved organic matter, O3-AOPs, FT-ICR MS, Membrane filtration, Membrane fouling
Suggested Citation:
Gao, Xiao-Xu and An, Ye-Chen and Wang, Yun-Wen and Ren, Rui-Yun and Hao, Zhineng and Han, Jinglong and Liu, Jingfu and Wang, Aijie and Wei, Huangzhao and Zhao, Xue-Zhi and Ren, Nanqi, Unravelling the Inconsistency in Organic Matter Removal and Membrane Fouling Control in Leather Mixed Wastewater Treated by Different O3-Aops. Available at SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4869568 or http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.4869568























Download This Paper
Open PDF in Browser
52 References
J Adusei-Gyamfi , B Ouddane , L Rietveld , J.-P Cornard , J Criquet
Natural organic matter-cations complexation and its impact on water treatment: A critical review
Water Res , volume 160 , p. 130 - 147 Posted: 2019
J Agbaba , J M Jazić , A Tubić , M Watson , S Maletić , M K Isakovski , B Dalmacija
Oxidation of natural organic matter with processes involving O3, H2O2and UV light: formation of oxidation and disinfection by-products
RSC Advances , volume 6 , p. 86212 - 86219 Posted: 2016
F J Beltrán , A Aguinaco , A Rey , J F García-Araya
Kinetic Studies on Black Light Photocatalytic Ozonation of Diclofenac and Sulfamethoxazole in Water
Ind. Eng. Chem. Res , volume 51 , p. 4533 - 4544 Posted: 2012
G.-Q Chen , Y.-H Wu , Y.-J Tan , Z Chen , X Tong , Y Bai , L.-W Luo , H.-B Wang , Y.-Q Xu , Z.-W Zhang , N Ikuno , H.-Y Hu
Pretreatment for alleviation of RO membrane fouling in dyeing wastewater reclamation
Chemosphere , volume 292 Posted: 2022
Load more
0 Citations
Do you have a job opening that you would like to promote on SSRN?
Place Job Opening
Paper statistics
DOWNLOADS
3
ABSTRACT VIEWS
28
52 References
PlumX Metrics
Related eJournals
Environmental Engineering & Technology eJournal
Follow
Feedback
Submit a Paper
Section 508 Text Only Pages
SSRN Quick Links
SSRN Solutions
Research Paper Series
Conference Papers
Partners in Publishing
Jobs & Announcements
Special Topic Hubs
SSRN Rankings
Top Papers
Top Authors
Top Organizations
About SSRN
Network Directors
Announcements
Contact us
FAQs
Copyright Terms and Conditions Privacy Policy
All content on this site: Copyright © 2023 Elsevier Inc., its licensors, and contributors. All rights are reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. For all open access content, the Creative Commons licensing terms apply.
We use cookies to help provide and enhance our service and tailor content.
To learn more, visit Cookie Settings.
We use cookies that are necessary to make our site work. We may also use additional cookies to analyze, improve, and personalize our content and your digital experience. For more information, see ourCookie Policy
Cookie Settings
Accept all cookies