Journals & Books
Help
Search
My account
Sign in
Access through your institution
Purchase PDF
Article preview
Abstract
Introduction
Section snippets
References (65)
Separation and Purification Technology
Available online 15 July 2024, 128824
In Press, Journal Pre-proof
What’s this?
Modulating adsorption-oxidation dual sites and confinement structure of interlayered MnO2/defective rGO nanoreactor for efficient and stable catalytic ozonation of CH3SH
Author links open overlay panel
Wenbin Huang a
,
Zhangnan Yao a
,
Huinan Zhao a
,
Chenghua Wang b
,
Zhong Fang b
,
Jun Du b
,
Yichang Yang a
,
Lingling Hu a
,
Zaili Zhang a
,
Shuanghong Tian a
,
Dong Shu c
,
Chun He a
Show more
Add to Mendeley
Share
Cite
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.seppur.2024.128824
Get rights and content
Highlights
•
Interlayered DrGO/MnO2-Vo nanoreactor was constructed.
•
DrGO/MnO2-Vo featured adsorption-oxidation dual sites and delimited void space.
•
DrGO/MnO2-Vo had ability to effective allocation of ozone/CH3SH.
•
Confinement effect of DrGO/MnO2-Vo boosted ROS yields and improved mass transfer.
•
DrGO/MnO2-Vo displayed outstanding stability and durability for removal of CH3SH.
Abstract
The design of catalyst structure and adsorption-oxidation sites is of great significance for catalytic ozonation to eliminate sulfur-containing volatile organic compounds (S-VOCs). Herein, a well-defined 2D/2D interlayered DrGO/MnO2-Vo consisting of oxygen vacancy-rich (Vo) MnO2 and defective reduced graphene oxide (DrGO) was successfully synthesized by face-to-face electrostatic self-assembly method. DrGO/MnO2-Vo with delimited void space could be employed as confined nanoreactor to boost reactive oxygen species (ROS) yields and improve mass transfer, thus achieving excellent methyl mercaptan (CH3SH) removal efficiency (82.4 %). The experimental results revealed that the DrGO/MnO2-Vo catalyst could still remove ∼74 % of CH3SH after running for 60 h at 25 ℃ with an initial concentration of 80 ppm CH3SH, 2 mg/L ozone, and a gas hourly space velocity (GHSV) of 60,000 mL/(h⋅g). The essence of the outstanding stability and durability of DrGO/MnO2-Vo lied in its role as an active dual-site catalyst, in which CH3SH was preferentially enriched on DrGO nanosheets and subsequently oxidized by ROS generated by ozone decomposition on the oxygen vacancies of MnO2 nanosheets. Additionally, the cycling redox of Mn2+/Mn3+→Mn4+→Mn2+/Mn3+ could regenerate oxygen vacancies of MnO2. This research offered novel perspectives on tackling the control issues related to S-VOCs.
Graphical abstract
Download: Download high-res image (160KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Introduction
Methyl mercaptan (CH3SH), a common sulfur-containing volatile organic compound (S-VOC), exhibits extremely low factory threshold (0.4 ppb/v) and high toxicity. It is prevalent in various industrial processes, landfill sites, and sewage treatment plants, posing significant threats to human health and ecological systems [1], [2], [3]. Till now, significant endeavors have been directed towards managing CH3SH, encompassing strategies such as biological degradation [4], absorption [5], and combustion [6]. Nevertheless, due to operational challenges, secondary waste pollution, and high energy consumption, these technologies are not economically viable for removing CH3SH at lower parts per million (ppm) levels. Lately, the catalytic ozonation of S-VOCs over transition metal oxides (NiO, CeO2, MnOx, and Co3O4, etc.) or supported metal catalysts (Au, Ag, Pt and Pd, etc.) has aroused much concern because efficient catalysts can convert S-VOCs into CO2 and H2O under mild conditions relying on the generated reactive oxygen species (ROS) as well as ozone molecules [7], [8].
Among these catalysts, manganese oxide (MnO2), consisting of edge sharing MnO6 octahedra, has demonstrated tremendous potential application in catalytic ozonation for S-VOCs elimination in terms of its multiple valence states, excellent physical and chemical properties, versatile structures, low cost, and nontoxicity [9], [10], [11], [12]. Especially, MnO2 doped with oxygen vacancies (MnO2-Vo) can improve the efficiency of catalytic ozonation since oxygen vacancies consistently demonstrate elevated surface energy to attract adjacent molecules [13]. Hong et al. suggested that oxygen vacancies on MnO2 served as the primary reactive sites for O3 adsorption and catalytic ozonation, based on both theoretical calculations and experimental findings [14]. Despite its promising results, the stability and durability of proposed catalyst still hindered its practical application in the catalytic ozonation process. On the one hand, sulfur atoms in S-VOCs and the reaction intermediates preferentially accumulated on the active sites of MnO2, resulting in the decrease and deactivation of the surface-active sites of MnO2 [15], [16], [17]. On the other hand, the poor electrical conductivity of MnO2 would hinder the activation of oxygen and the transfer of oxygen through the redox cycles via the electron migration, resulting in the limited catalytic efficiency of MnO2 in catalytic ozonation process [18]. Recently, Ma et al. developed a dual-site catalyst with Pt loaded on interstitial carbon for the catalytic ozonation degradation of CH3SH [19]. The excellent catalytic performance was attributed to the dual-site catalytic structure, which could simultaneously promote the adsorption/activation of O3 on interstitial carbon and the capture/oxidation of CH3SH on Pt. Although much efforts have been directed to improve the performance and durability of 0-dimensional (0D) MnO2-based composites for VOCs removal by designing surface active centers [20], [21], [22]. The catalytic oxidation with ozone was limited due to the decrease of active sites, large steric hindrance and slow electron transfer in 0D MnO2 composites-involved oxidation process. For example, Qi et al. found that the pore size of the catalyst decreased and the steric hindrance of the catalyst increased by loading iron oxide and manganese oxide on Al2O3, which was not conducive to the improvement of the catalytic activity of the catalyst [23]. Therefore, the catalyst design for S-VOCs elimination requires a delicate control of integrating active sites with different functions of multi-components to balance efficiency and durability.
Recently, 2D/2D interlayered structures have garnered attentions due to their relatively large contact interfacial areas, well-defined active sites, and efficient charge separation efficiency [24], [25], [26]. Graphene-based 2D structures, as representative 2D materials, have attracted significant interest for diverse heterogeneous catalytic reactions [27]. It has been reported that manganese oxides supported on graphene-based materials could promote VOCs elimination due to the function of graphene-based materials and manganese oxides, in which graphene-based materials served not only as the carrier of MnO2 dispersion, but also as the adsorption sites of VOCs [28], [29], [30]. More interestingly, Hu et al reported non-competitive dual-site MnO2/graphene catalysts for catalytic ozonation, in which MnO2 was responsible for ozone decomposition and graphene was conducive to the adsorption of benzene [31]. Furthermore, the defects in graphene-based materials played a significant role in enhancing the adsorption of organic substances since defects on reduced graphene oxide could amplify its electron-donating capacity [32], [33]. Inspired by this, combining 2D/2D interlayered structures with defective reduced graphene oxide (DrGO) nanosheets and 2D MnO2 nanosheets is expected as a promising strategy to improve the well-defined active sites for the effective allocation of O3/CH3SH and increase electrical conductivity for accelerating the cycling redox of Mn2+/Mn3+→Mn4+→Mn2+/Mn3+, thus promoting the catalytic performance and durability. Particularly, the structure limitation of the catalyst usually led to insufficient exposure of the active sites to generate the active oxygen, and the active oxygen generated on the surface with a very short service life (10-6–10-9 s) after oxidation hindered the effective diffusion of ROS to the target CH3SH [34]. In this case, conducting catalytic ozonation in 2D/2D interlayered confined space appeared to address these problems and optimize the availability of actives sites and minimize the mass transfer limitation of short-lived species, which could enable high yields and efficient utilization of instantaneously produced ROS [35], [36]. Therefore, it is expected that 2D/2D interlayered DrGO/MnO2-Vo with inner nanochannels can act as a nanoreactor to achieve the synergistic effect of MnO2 and defective reduced graphene oxide on the catalytic ozonation of CH3SH, in which the catalytic reaction of CH3SH and ozone are confined in nanoreactor and Mn-based components execute catalysis through the transmission and cooperation.
Herein, a well-defined 2D/2D interlayered DrGO/MnO2-Vo with inner nanochannels was designed and constructed via face-to-face electrostatic self-assembly method. The unique structure of DrGO/MnO2-Vo designed for catalytic ozonation greatly improved the performance in CH3SH elimination for several reasons: (1) The structure of interlayered DrGO/MnO2-Vo with inner nanochannels provided a higher specific surface area, good conductivity, and delimited void space, which were beneficial to the synergistic effect on the ozone catalytic oxidation of CH3SH between MnO2-Vo and DrGO. (2) The effective spacial distribution of ozone and CH3SH on MnO2-Vo and DrGO within the DrGO/MnO2-Vo nanoreactor avoided the preferential accumulation of CH3SH and reaction intermediates on the active sites of MnO2, helping to maintain the longer catalyst activity. (3) The DrGO/MnO2-Vo nanoreactor featured an interlayer structure with highly defined active sites and delimited void space, representing a confined nanoreactor for boosting ROS yields and mass transfer. The interlayered DrGO/MnO2-Vo architecture with inner nanochannels offered an idea model to address the current multiple challenges in efficient and long-term S-VOCs control.
Section snippets
Material synthesis
Synthesis of defective reduced graphene oxide (DrGO) nanosheets: The detailed procedure for preparing DrGO was shown in Supporting Information (Text S2). The prepared DrGO was dispersed in 0.25 M sodium dodecyl benzene sulfonate (SDBS) solution, and then ultrasonicated to obtain a black colloidal suspension.
Preparation of MnO2 with oxygen vacancy (MnO2-Vo) nanosheets: The detailed procedure for preparing birnessite was shown in Supporting Information (Text S3). The obtained birnessite was
Characterizations of morphology and structure
The DrGO/MnO2-Vo interlayered hybrids were synthesized by electrostatic self-assembly method. The zeta potentials of colloidal MnO2-Vo solution and DrGO solution were approximately 30.6 and −28.3 mV, respectively, demonstrating that MnO2-Vo nanosheets in TMAOH solution were positively charged, whereas DrGO nanosheets carried negative charges in SDBS solution. Hence both MnO2-Vo and DrGO were stable in colloidal solution presented in Fig. S1. After a facile liquid-phase mixing, interlayer
Conclusion
Interlayered DrGO/MnO2-Vo nanoreactor was prepared via electrostatic self-assembly method and efficiently utilized for catalytic ozonation of CH3SH with high stability because of the following cooperative effects: (1) The DrGO/MnO2-Vo nanoreactor with interlayer structure had a higher specific surface area and more reactive sites, which was conducive to produce more ROS; (2) The confinement effect of interlayer DrGO/MnO2-Vo enhanced the reaction between instantaneously produced ROS and the
CRediT authorship contribution statement
Wenbin Huang: Methodology, Validation, Investigation, Data curation, Writing – original draft. Zhangnan Yao: Data curation, Visualization. Huinan Zhao: . Chenghua Wang: Data curation, Formal analysis. Zhong Fang: Data curation, Formal analysis. Jun Du: Data curation, Formal analysis. Yichang Yang: Data curation, Formal analysis. Lingling Hu: Writing – review & editing, Methodology, Validation, Investigation, Data curation, Software. Zaili Zhang: Data curation, Formal analysis. Shuanghong Tian:
Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.
Acknowledgements
The authors thank the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Nos. 52070195, 21876212), Guangdong Basic and Applied Basic Research Foundation (No. 2023A1515012198), Technology Research and Development Project (Nos. CNCEC YAN-202402, CNCEC YAN-202401) of China National Chemistry Southern Construction & Investment Co., Ltd. for financially supporting this work.
References (65)
J. Yang et al.
Three-dimensional hierarchical porous sludge-derived carbon supported on silicon carbide foams as effective and stable Fenton-like catalyst for odorous methyl mercaptan elimination
J. Hazard. Mater.
(2018)
Z. Zhang et al.
Synthesis of amine grafted Cu-BTC and its application in regenerable adsorption of ultra-low concentration methyl mercaptan
Sep. Purif. Technol.
(2023)
R. Lebrero et al.
Odor abatement in biotrickling filters: Effect of the ebrt on methyl mercaptan and hydrophobic VOCs removal
Bioresour. Technol.
(2012)
P.-J. Liang et al.
Simultaneous absorption of H2S, MM and COS into a novel srsg absorbent using a rotating packed bed
Sep. Purif. Technol.
(2024)
X. Liang et al.
Experimental study on sulfur-containing products in pressurised oxy-fuel pyrolysis of pulverised coal
J. Clean. Prod.
(2021)
C. He et al.
Realizing a redox-robust Ag/MnO2 catalyst for efficient wet catalytic ozonation of S-VOCs: Promotional role of Ag(0)/Ag(I)-Mn based redox shuttle
Appl. Catal. B Environ. Energy.
(2022)
L. Liu et al.
Enhanced catalytic oxidation of toluene over manganese-based multi-metal oxides synthesized by ozone driving redox reaction
Sep. Purif. Technol.
(2022)
Z. Wang et al.
Effects of sulfur poisoning on physicochemical properties and performance of MnO2/AlNi-PILC for toluene catalytic combustion
J. Hazard. Mater.
(2022)
Z. Fan et al.
Gd-modified MnOx for the selective catalytic reduction of NO by NH3: The promoting effect of Gd on the catalytic performance and sulfur resistance
Chem. Eng. J.
(2018)
Y. Zhao et al.
Cobalt-doped MnO2 ultrathin nanosheets with abundant oxygen vacancies supported on functionalized carbon nanofibers for efficient oxygen evolution
Nano Energy.
(2018)
View more references
Cited by (0)
View full text
© 2024 Elsevier B.V. All rights are reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies.
Recommended articles
Effect of thermosonication on the bioactive peptide profile, volatile compounds, and fatty acid profile of Minas Frescal cheese
International Dairy Journal, Volume 157, 2024, Article 106009
Hugo Scudino, …, Adriano G. Cruz
Sequential treatment with pressurized fluid processing and ultrasonication for biorefinery of canola straw towards lignocellulosic nanofiber production
Industrial Crops and Products, Volume 139, 2019, Article 111521
Raquel Razzera Huerta, Marleny D.A. Saldaña
Acerola processing waste: Convective