Your privacy, your choice
We use essential cookies to make sure the site can function. We, and our 209 partners, also use optional cookies and similar technologies for advertising, personalisation of content, usage analysis, and social media.
By accepting optional cookies, you consent to allowing us and our partners to store and access personal data on your device, such as browsing behaviour and unique identifiers. Some third parties are outside of the European Economic Area, with varying standards of data protection. See our privacy policy for more information on the use of your personal data. Your consent choices apply to springer.com and applicable subdomains.
You can find further information, and change your preferences via 'Manage preferences'.
You can also change your preferences or withdraw consent at any time via 'Your privacy choices', found in the footer of every page.
We use cookies and similar technologies for the following purposes:
Store and/or access information on a device
Personalised advertising and content, advertising and content measurement, audience research and services development
Accept all cookies
Reject optional cookies
Manage preferences
Skip to main content
Log in
Find a journal
Publish with us
Track your research
Search
Cart
Home Journal of Neuro-Oncology Article
Super T2-FLAIR mismatch sign: a prognostic imaging biomarker for non-enhancing astrocytoma, IDH-mutant
Research
Open access
Published: 12 July 2024
(2024)
Cite this article
Download PDF
You have full access to this
open access
article
Journal of Neuro-Oncology
Aims and scope
Submit manuscript
Iori Ozono, Shumpei Onishi, Ushio Yonezawa, Akira Taguchi, Novita Ikbar Khairunnisa, Vishwa Jeet Amatya, Fumiyuki Yamasaki, Yukio Takeshima & Nobutaka Horie 
167 Accesses
Explore all metrics
Abstract
Purpose
The T2-FLAIR mismatch sign is a highly specific diagnostic imaging biomarker for astrocytoma, IDH-mutant. However, a definitive prognostic imaging biomarker has yet to be identified. This study investigated imaging prognostic markers, specifically analyzing T2-weighted and FLAIR images of this tumor.
Methods
We retrospectively analyzed 31 cases of non-enhancing astrocytoma, IDH-mutant treated at our institution, and 30 cases from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA)/The Cancer Imaging Archive (TCIA). We defined “super T2-FLAIR mismatch sign” as having a significantly strong low signal comparable to cerebrospinal fluid at non-cystic lesions rather than just a pale FLAIR low-signal tumor lesion as in conventional T2-FLAIR mismatch sign. Cysts were defined as having a round or oval shape and were excluded from the criteria for the super T2-FLAIR mismatch sign. We evaluated the presence or absence of the T2-FLAIR mismatch sign and super T2-FLAIR mismatch sign using preoperative MRI and analyzed the progression-free survival (PFS) and overall survival (OS) by log-rank test.
Results
The T2-FLAIR mismatch sign was present in 17 cases (55%) in our institution and 9 cases (30%) within the TCGA-LGG dataset without any correlation with PFS or OS. However, the super T2-FLAIR mismatch sign was detected in 8 cases (26%) at our institution and 13 cases (43%) in the TCGA-LGG dataset. At our institution, patients displaying the super T2-FLAIR mismatch sign showed significantly extended PFS (122.7 vs. 35.9 months, p = 0.0491) and OS (not reached vs. 116.7 months, p = 0.0232). Similarly, in the TCGA-LGG dataset, those with the super T2-FLAIR mismatch sign exhibited notably longer OS (not reached vs. 44.0 months, p = 0.0177).
Conclusion
The super T2-FLAIR mismatch is a promising prognostic imaging biomarker for non-enhancing astrocytoma, IDH-mutant.
Similar content being viewed by others
Radiographic assessment of contrast enhancement and T2/FLAIR mismatch sign in lower grade gliomas: correlation with molecular groups
Article 07 December 2018
Patterns of T2-FLAIR discordance across a cohort of adult-type diffuse gliomas and deviations from the classic T2-FLAIR mismatch sign
Article 13 February 2024
Combining hyperintense FLAIR rim and radiological features in identifying IDH mutant 1p/19q non-codeleted lower-grade glioma
Article 25 January 2022
Introduction
The 2016 update of the World Health Organization (WHO) classification of central nervous system (CNS) tumors marked a pivotal shift in brain tumor diagnosis, transitioning from traditional histopathologic classification to molecular genetic classification [1]. This approach decreased the interobserver variation inherent in histological diagnoses [2] and enabled stratification of patient prognosis [3,4,5,6]. This approach was further developed in the WHO CNS 5th edition, updated in 2021, and further refined the classification of adult-type diffuse gliomas based on the status of the isocitrate dehydrogenase (IDH) gene and chromosome 1p and 19q [7]. The diffuse gliomas with IDH mutation and 1p/19q non-codeletion are now diagnosed as “astrocytoma, IDH-mutant,” delineating them from “glioblastoma, IDH-wildtype” and “oligodendroglioma, IDH-mutant and 1p/19q codeleted” due to distinct prognostic and clinical/genetic characteristics. The preoperative identification of diffuse gliomas holds substantial clinical value, given that gross total resection significantly enhances prognosis in “astrocytoma, IDH-mutant” compared to other entities [8, 9].
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) plays a crucial role in the preoperative diagnosis of tumors and establishing treatment strategies. Recent studies have highlighted the molecular diagnostic significance of MRI findings. Particularly, the T2-weighted Imaging-Fluid-Attenuated Inversion Recovery (T2-FLAIR) mismatch sign has been established as a diagnostic imaging biomarker for astrocytoma, IDH-mutant with a high predictive value and specificity [10,11,12]. However, previous studies found no correlation between the T2-FLAIR mismatch sign and progression-free survival (PFS) or overall survival (OS) [10, 13]. Several clinical, molecular, and pathological prognostic factors for patients with IDH-mutant astrocytoma have been identified, including age, tumor size, primary tumor site, surgical outcome, mitotic index, and CDKN2A/B homozygous deletion [14,15,16]. The CDKN2A/B homozygous deletion has been incorporated into the grading criteria for these tumors, leading to the classification of tumors with CDKN2A/B deletion as WHO grade 4 [7]. Various imaging biomarkers have been explored to differentiate WHO grade 4 from WHO grade 2–3 astrocytoma with IDH mutation. These include gadolinium enhancement, low apparent diffusion coefficient, high cerebral tumor blood volume, and intratumoral susceptibility signal intensity observed in gadolinium-enhanced T1-weighted imaging, diffusion-weighted imaging, perfusion-weighted imaging, and susceptibility-weighted imaging, respectively [17]. However, prognostic imaging biomarkers for predicting WHO grade 2–3 astrocytoma, specifically non-enhancing astrocytoma, IDH-mutant are limited.
This study aimed to develop a useful prognostic imaging biomarker of non-enhancing astrocytoma, IDH-mutant. Our review encompassed our institutional case series and data from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA)/The Cancer Imaging Archive (TCIA) pertaining to astrocytoma, IDH-mutant. We focused on the observation of a conspicuously low-intensity lesion in FLAIR imaging, occasionally encountered in this tumor, and named “super T2-FLAIR mismatch sign” and investigated the prognostic value of this sign.
Materials and methods
This retrospective study was approved by our institutional review board (E2022-0038). This study utilized data from two cohorts; the patients treated at our institute and publicly available data from TCGA/TCIA, TCGA-lower grade glioma (LGG) [18]. The patients who fulfilled the following criteria were included in this study: (i) newly diagnosed astrocytoma, IDH-mutant; (ii) tumors with WHO grade 2 or 3. (iii) Participants with available preoperative MR images with FLAIR, T2WI, T1-weighted imaging (T1WI) and post-contrast T1WI. (iv) Tumors with no evident gadolinium contrast enhancement on post-contrast T1WI.
Patient data and molecular pathological analysis in our institution
Between October 2009 and September 2022, 31 patients met the eligibility criteria. Pertinent clinical data, including age at diagnosis, gender, Karnofsky performance status (KPS), tumor WHO grade, extent of tumor resection (total or non-total), administration of radiation therapy, chemotherapy using temozolomide, PFS, and OS, were collected from medical records.
Surgically resected tumor specimens underwent fixation in 10% phosphate-buffered formalin and subsequent embedding in paraffin blocks. Standard histological diagnosis was conducted by staining representative slides with hematoxylin-eosin reagent. Immunohistochemical staining for IDH1-R132H and α-thalassemia X-linked intellectual disability (ATRX) was performed using an automated immunostainer (BenchMark GX; Ventana). 1p/19q co-deletions were detected through fluorescence in situ hybridization analysis on paraffin-embedded tumor tissue samples [19]. In our study, direct confirmation of CDKN2A/B homozygous deletion has not been obtained. However, we have assessed the S-methyl-50-thioadenosine phosphorylase (MTAP) immunostaining, which has been reported as an excellent surrogate marker. Cases with negative MTAP staining were excluded as they were diagnosed as astrocytoma, grade 4, according to WHO 2021 criteria [20]. Tumors were diagnosed based on WHO CNS 5th edition [7].
MR acquisition and evaluation
MR scans were acquired using 3.0 T scanners (Ingenia CX 3.0 T; Philips Healthcare, Best, Netherlands, or Signa Excite HD 3.0 T; GE Medical Systems, Milwaukee, WI, USA). Preoperative T1WI, T2WI, FLAIR, and post-contrast T1WI sequencing were each evaluated by two board-certified neurosurgeons (I.O. and S.O.). The imaging parameters are described in Supplementary Material 1.
Patient data in TCGA-LGG
MRI was available for 199 cases of LGGs in the TCIA database. Clinical information (age, gender, PFS, OS), histopathology, WHO grade, and molecular classifications were obtained from the Supplementary Material of a previously published article [21]. This study included 30 cases of LGG with IDH-mutant and 1p/19q non-codeleted, which can be considered astrocytoma, IDH-mutant. The other molecular types of LGG (101 cases), cases without appropriate images (37 cases), and cases with obvious contrast enhancement (31 cases) were excluded.
Definition of conventional T2-FLAIR mismatch sign and “super T2-FLAIR mismatch sign”
The conventional T2-FLAIR mismatch sign was designated as per the original definition [10]; the presence of a complete/near-complete hyperintense signal on T2WI and a relatively hypointense signal on FLAIR except for a hyperintense peripheral rim. Based on a previous article, a positive T2-FLAIR mismatch sign was defined as a tumor with > 50% T2-FLAIR mismatch lesion [22].
We defined the ‘super T2-FLAIR mismatch sign’ as a tumor displaying a complete or near-complete hyperintense signal on T2-weighted imaging (T2WI) while exhibiting significantly strong low intensity comparable to cerebrospinal fluid. This characteristic contrasts with the conventional T2-FLAIR mismatch, which typically presents as a pale FLAIR low-intensity tumor lesion. Additionally, cysts possessing well-defined margins of a round or oval shape within the tumor were excluded from the super T2-FLAIR mismatch sign criteria. In our study, the super T2-FLAIR mismatch sign was identified by the presence of the lesion with a diameter measuring 5 mm or larger.
The two reviewers (I.O. with 9 years of experience and S.O. with 11 years of experience) were blinded to each other’s results. The inter-reviewer agreement was evaluated using the Kappa statistic (κ = 0–0.40, poor; κ = 0.41–0.60, moderate; κ = 0.61–0.80, good; κ = 0.81–1.00, excellent). In the event of disagreement, two reviewers discussed the findings, and a final consensus was reached with the involvement of a senior neurosurgeon (F.Y. with 30 years of experience).
Statistical analysis
PFS was defined as the time from initial surgery to the tumor progression or tumor-related death. OS was defined as the time from initial surgery to the tumor-related death. The PFS and OS of the patients were analyzed using a Kaplan–Meier analysis. The patients were divided into two groups based on the presence or absence of the conventional T2-FLAIR mismatch sign and the super T2-FLAIR mismatch sign, and the PFS and OS were compared using log-rank tests. The patients’ characteristics and clinical information were compared using Fisher’s exact test. All statistical analyses were performed using JMP® Pro version 17 (SAS Institute, Cary, NC, USA). P-values of less than 0.05 indicated statistical significance.
Results
Clinical and radiological characteristics of our institution dataset
The mean age of the 31 cases was 40.6 ± 12.7 years, comprising 10 females and 21 males. Among the included patients, 25 (81%) cases were classified as WHO grade 2, while 6 (19%) were designated as WHO grade 3. In terms of treatment, total resection was accomplished in 10 (32%) cases, 21 (68%) cases received radiation therapy, and temozolomide was administered in 19 (61%) cases.
The T2-FLAIR mismatch sign and super T2-FLAIR mismatch sign were presented in 17 cases (55%) and 8 cases (26%), respectively. Inter-reviewer agreement for these mismatch signs was excellent (κ = 1.000, 1.000, respectively). Supplementary Material 2 shows the characteristics of our dataset according to the status of the T2-FLAIR mismatch sign. The T2-FLAIR mismatch sign-positive cases were more frequent at WHO grade 2 in our dataset (p = 0.0671). Other factors, including age, gender, and extent of resection, were not associated with this sign. Table 1 shows the characteristics of our dataset according to the status of the super T2-FLAIR mismatch sign. No significant difference in WHO grade was observed between positive and negative super T2-FLAIR mismatch signs (p = 0.2976). The representative case with the positive super T2-FLAIR mismatch sign and positive conventional T2-FLAIR mismatch sign is shown as Case 1 (Fig. 1). The representative case with the positive super T2-FLAIR mismatch sign but negative conventional T2-FLAIR mismatch sign is shown as Case 2 (Fig. 1). The representative case of the negative super T2-FLAIR mismatch sign and negative conventional T2-FLAIR mismatch sign is shown as Case 3 (Fig. 2). The representative case of the negative super T2-FLAIR mismatch sign but positive conventional T2-FLAIR mismatch sign is shown as Case 4