Skip to main content
Other Publications
My alerts
Search for this keyword
Advanced Search
Home
Articles
Info for
About CFP
Feedback
Blogs
Mainpro+ Credits
RSS feeds
Follow cfp Template on Twitter
LinkedIn
Instagram
RE: Climate-conscious inhaler prescribing for family physicians
Roni Y Kraut, Family Physician, Department of Family Medicine, University of Alberta
27 June 2024
It is great to see that Canadian Family Physician published an article on environmental stewardship (“Climate-conscious inhaler prescribing for family physicians.” ) (1) The Climate-Conscious Inhaler Prescribing Sustainable Pathway highlighted in the article is a helpful addition to my family medicine practice, and I appreciate the time and effort that went into its development.
I want to comment and expand on Step 3 of the pathway: Switching inhalers from metered dose inhalers (MDIs) to dry powder inhalers (DPIs). While switching from MDIs to DPIs will help reduce carbon impact, it is important to realize that the actual carbon impact of switching from MDI to DPI is not simply a 10-fold reduction as the article suggests, but at best an educated guess. The calculation involves many factors (for example, methodology, type of inhaler, type of propellant) and the data used in such calculations are often estimated, incomplete, and/or not independently certified. (2,3) In addition, the environmental impact of inhalers includes more than the carbon impact; other impacts include fossil and metal depletion, ozone depletion, and ocean acidification. The extent of these factors is still unclear. To my knowledge, the only publication on this showed that MDIs (with HFC-134a propellant, the most common propellant used in Canada) have a lower or similar impact compared to DPIs in 11 of the 14 environmental areas. The caveat, though, is that the study was funded by a propellant manufacturer. (4,5)
I also suggest that we should strive to present a balanced view. Specifically, the CASCADES poster that appears in the article, “Depending on the type, 1 aerosol inhaler can have the same carbon footprint as driving up to 170 km in a gas car,” represents the extreme rather than the average impact. The following statement may be more useful and is calculated using the km equivalent of an average MDI (98 km drive): “The daily use of an aerosol inhaler is equivalent to a ∼1 km drive daily, while in comparison, a daily cup of orange juice is equivalent to a ∼2 km drive daily, and one weekly burger is equivalent to a ∼3 km drive daily.”(6) Finally, this year I have been at several well-intentioned QI project presentations on switching inhalers based on CASCADES material. The presenters appeared unaware that this poster represented an extreme case; that switching inhalers is not a high-yield intervention; and there is uncertainty underlying the actual carbon impact.
It is important for all of us to work together toward an environmentally sustainable future and the Climate-Conscious Inhaler Prescribing Sustainable Pathway is a welcome step. As CASCADES continues with its much-needed initiatives, I hope it will reconsider its messaging around switching inhalers.
1. Green S, Stoynova V, Culley C, Kaplan A, Hale I, Simms N, et al. Climate-conscious inhaler prescribing for family physicians. Can Fam Physician. 2024;70(6):381-87.
2. PrescQIPP Community Interest Company. Bulletin 295: Inhaler Carbon Footprint. Attachment 1. Available from: https://www.prescqipp.info/our-resources/bulletins/bulletin-295-inhaler-.... Accessed 2024 June 25.
3. CASCADES Inhaler Coverage Chart – Appendix. Available from: https://cascadescanada.ca/wp-content/uploads/2022/09/Inhaler-Coverage-Ch.... Accessed 2024 June 25.
4. Jeswani HK, Azapagic A. Life cycle environmental impact of inhalers. J. Clean. Prod. 2019;237:117733.
5. Jeswani HK, Azapagic A. Addendum to “Life cycle environmental impacts of inhalers” [J. Clean. Prod. 237 (2019) 117733]. J Clean Prod 2023;389:135918.
6. United Nations. The Montreal protocol on substances that deplete the ozone layer. 2018 report of the medical and chemical technical options Committee (MCTOC), 2018. Available from: https://ozone.unep.org/sites/default/ files/2019- 04/ MCTOC- Assessment- Report-2018.pdf. Accessed 2024 June 23.
Competing Interests: None declared.
Navigate
Home
Current Issue
Archive
Collections - English
Collections - Française
For Authors
Authors and Reviewers
Submit a Manuscript
Permissions
Terms of Use
General Information
About CFP
About the CFPC
Advertisers
Careers & Locums
Editorial Advisory Board
Subscribers
Journal Services
Email Alerts
Twitter
LinkedIn
Instagram
RSS Feeds
Copyright © 2024 by The College of Family Physicians of Canada
We use cookies on this site to enhance your user experience. By clicking any link on this page you are giving your consent for us to set cookies.
Continue Find out more