IEEE.org
IEEE Xplore
IEEE SA
IEEE Spectrum
More Sites
Subscribe
Donate
Cart
Create Account
Personal Sign In
Browse
My Settings
Help
Institutional Sign In
All
Books
Conferences
Courses
Journals & Magazines
Standards
Authors
Citations
ADVANCED SEARCH
Journals & Magazines >IEEE Journal of Selected Topi... >Early Access
The influence of commuting on population exposure to air pollution: Toward global application with a proxy on the degree of urbanization
Publisher: IEEE
Cite This
PDF
Lorenza Gilardi; Thilo Erbertseder; Frank Baier; Heiko Paeth; Tobias Ullmann; Hannes Taubenböck
All Authors
Open Access
Under a Creative Commons License
Abstract
Authors
Keywords
Supplemental Items
Abstract:
Urban populations are significantly affected by air pollution, which poses a major threat to public health. However, standardized and public mobility data, essential for an exposure assessment, are frequently unavailable. Earth Observation-derived and model datasets can support large-scale health studies especially in remote areas with limited data availability. This study investigates the use of a globally-derivable variable from remote sensing data to estimate the static versus dynamic population exposure difference. A health risk assessment using a higher and a lower-resolution air pollution data was performed. This was achieved by examining air pollution concentrations in two European regions, Lombardy, in Italy, and Germany, incorporating commuting datasets. Accordingly, a retrospective long-term exposure assessment to particulate matter less than 2.5 microns (PM2.5), nitrogen dioxide (NO2), and ozone (O3) was performed from 2013 to 2022. The study evaluates the difference between the resident and the dynamic population exposed to concentrations exceeding the new limits set by the World Health Organization (WHO). The relation between pollutants concentration and the Fraction of Settlement Area (FSA), a proxy of urbanization levels, derived from the global World Settlement Footprint dataset was explored. Two pollution datasets were used: with European, and global coverage. The analysis decouples daytime and nighttime hours. For each region and pollutant specific FSA thresholds were identified, that maximize the population exposure gap. Our findings highlight the impact of air pollution on population health, revealing widespread exposure exceeding WHO limits, particularly for PM2.5, and emphasizing the importance of considering diurnal exposure variations in health risk assessments.
Published in: IEEE Journal of Selected Topics in Applied Earth Observations and Remote Sensing ( Early Access )
Page(s): 1 - 13
Date of Publication: 01 July 2024
ISSN Information:
DOI: 10.1109/JSTARS.2024.3420155
Publisher: IEEE
Authors
Keywords
Supplemental Items
More Like This
Remote sensing of aerosols in urban areas: sun/shadow retrieval procedure from airborne very high spatial resolution images
2009 Joint Urban Remote Sensing Event
Published: 2009
Linked Data Analytics in Interdisciplinary Studies: The Health Impact of Air Pollution in Urban Areas
IEEE Access
Published: 2016
Show More
IEEE Personal Account
CHANGE USERNAME/PASSWORD
Purchase Details
PAYMENT OPTIONS
VIEW PURCHASED DOCUMENTS
Profile Information
COMMUNICATIONS PREFERENCES
PROFESSION AND EDUCATION
TECHNICAL INTERESTS
Need Help?
US & CANADA: +1 800 678 4333
WORLDWIDE: +1 732 981 0060
CONTACT & SUPPORT
Follow
About IEEE Xplore | Contact Us | Help | Accessibility | Terms of Use | Nondiscrimination Policy | IEEE Ethics Reporting | Sitemap | IEEE Privacy Policy
A not-for-profit organization, IEEE is the world's largest technical professional organization dedicated to advancing technology for the benefit of humanity.
© Copyright 2024 IEEE - All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies.