Your Privacy
We use cookies to make sure that our website works properly, as well as some 'optional' cookies to personalise content and advertising, provide social media features and analyse how people use our site. By accepting some or all optional cookies you give consent to the processing of your personal data, including transfer to third parties, some in countries outside of the European Economic Area that do not offer the same data protection standards as the country where you live. You can decide which optional cookies to accept by clicking on 'Manage preferences', where you can also find more information about how your personal data is processed. Further information can be found in our privacy policy.
Accept all cookies
Manage preferences
Browse
Tools & Services
About
Sign In
Submit a Preprint
Research Article
Photocatalytic Ozonation-Electroflucculation Process for the Treatment of pharmaceutical wastewater using modified bentonite /UV/TiO2/ZnO
Tayyaba Jamil
This is a preprint; it has not been peer reviewed by a journal.
https://doi.org/10.21203/rs.3.rs-4567955/v1
This work is licensed under a CC BY 4.0 License
Abstract
The study aims to investigate the effectiveness of photocatalyst (Clay/UV/TiO2/ZnO) for antibiotic removal from real pharmaceutical wastewater by Combined UV, Catalytic Ozonation-Electroflucculation process. The experiments were performed in a modified hybrid batch reactor with UV-C lamp. The effect of four operational variables such as the applied voltage of (5–15 V), ozone dose of (0.2–0.8 mg/min), pH (5–10), and catalyst dose (0.5–1.5 g/L) on turbidity and COD removal was investigated. Removal efficiencies of antibiotics (carbamazepine and amoxicillin) were evaluated and compared with ozonation (O3), photocatalytic Ozonation (UV/O3), Electroflucculation (EF)/UV, catalytic ozonation/UV, and Hybrid O3/catalytic ozonation/UV/EF. The results showed that the modified hybrid process with UV irradiations provided the highest removal efficiency of 86.9% for COD, and turbidity of 81.66% under optimized conditions of (DC volts of 10 V; catalyst dose of 1 g/L, and ozone dose of 0.6mg/min). The pharmaceuticals removal obtained for amoxicillin was 100% and 95% for carbamazepine. The detailed mechanism was also explored for better understanding of each process. The combined process was effective for treating pharmaceutical wastewater. Therefore, it was suggested that the novel photocatalyst and hybrid system can be used for treating real effluents in large scale and to meet UN sustainability goals.
Antibiotics
Combine
Hybrid
Pharmaceutical
Photocatalyst
Wastewater
Full Text
Additional Declarations
Cite
Share
PDF
Status:
Posted
Version 1
posted 24 Jun, 2024
You are reading this latest preprint version
Citations
See more
Engagement
42 views
Comments
0
Research Square lets you share your work early, gain feedback from the community, and start making changes to your manuscript prior to peer review in a journal.
As a division of Research Square Company, we’re committed to making research communication faster, fairer, and more useful. We do this by developing innovative software and high quality services for the global research community. Our growing team is made up of researchers and industry professionals working together to solve the most critical problems facing scientific publishing.
Also discoverable on
PLATFORM
About
Our Team
In Review
Editorial Policies
Advisory Board
Contact Us
Help Center
RESOURCES
Author Services
Research Quality Evaluation
Blog
Accessibility
API Access
RSS feed
Cookies Settings
COMPANY
About Us
Careers
Partner With Us
Responsibility
Press
© Research Square 2024 | ISSN 2693-5015 (online)
Privacy Policy
Terms of Service
Do Not Sell My Personal Information
By clicking “Accept All Cookies”, you agree to the storing of cookies on your device to enhance site navigation, analyze site usage, and assist in our marketing efforts. Privacy Policy
Cookies Settings Accept All Cookies