Your privacy, your choice
We use essential cookies to make sure the site can function. We, and our 209 partners, also use optional cookies and similar technologies for advertising, personalisation of content, usage analysis, and social media.
By accepting optional cookies, you consent to allowing us and our partners to store and access personal data on your device, such as browsing behaviour and unique identifiers. Some third parties are outside of the European Economic Area, with varying standards of data protection. See our privacy policy for more information on the use of your personal data. Your consent choices apply to nature.com and applicable subdomains.
You can find further information, and change your preferences via 'Manage preferences'.
You can also change your preferences or withdraw consent at any time via 'Your privacy choices', found in the footer of every page.
We use cookies and similar technologies for the following purposes:
Store and/or access information on a device
Personalised advertising and content, advertising and content measurement, audience research and services development
Accept all cookies
Reject optional cookies
Manage preferences
Skip to main content
Advertisement
View all journals
Search
Log in
Explore content
About the journal
Publish with us
Sign up for alerts
RSS feed
nature npj climate and atmospheric science articles article
Article
Open access
Published: 18 June 2024
Hemispherical scale mechanisms of nitrate formation in global marine aerosols
Qibin Lao, Hongliang Li, Jinpei Yan, Guangzhe Jin, Guirong He, Chunqing Chen, Qingmei Zhu & Fajin Chen
  npj Climate and Atmospheric Science
 7, Article number: 139 (2024) Cite this article
486 Accesses
1 Altmetric
Metrics
Abstract
Nitrogen oxides (NOx) in the atmosphere directly affect air quality; however, their oxidation products (e.g., nitrate) are essential nutrients in terrestrial and marine ecosystems. To date, the mechanism and rate of nitrate formation in the global-scale marine boundary layer remains uncertain. Herein, aerosol nitrate isotopes covering the global ocean were analysed and observations indicated that nitrate formation was dominated by the proportion between the hydroxyl radical (daytime) and ozone (nighttime) pathways in the Northern Hemisphere (NH), whereas it changed to the BrO (Antarctic iceberg emission) pathway in the Southern Hemisphere (SH). These differences in the pathways suggested that the NOx removal (nitrate formation) efficiency was higher in the NH, which could be responsible for the much higher nitrate concentrations in the NH than in the SH (over twice). This study can assist in formulating effective policies to mitigate global NOx pollution and improve our understanding of the impact of increasing NOx concentrations on global ocean productivity.
Similar content being viewed by others
Changes in atmospheric oxidants over Arctic Ocean atmosphere: evidence of oxygen isotope anomaly in nitrate aerosols
Article Open access
23 August 2023
A diurnal story of Δ17O( $$\rm{NO}_{3}^{-}$$ ) in urban Nanjing and its implication for nitrate aerosol formation
Article Open access
21 June 2022
Increased aerosol concentrations in the High Arctic attributable to changing atmospheric transport patterns
Article Open access
01 August 2022
Introduction
Nitrogen oxides (NOx = NO2 + NO) are essential for the formation of secondary atmospheric aerosols and atmospheric oxidants, including ozone (O3) and hydroxyl radicals (OH), which control the self-cleaning capacity of the atmosphere1. Although NOx emissions have generally decreased in Europe and North America owing to effective control measures2,3, they continue to increase in most regions (such as East and South Asia) because of intensive anthropogenic activities4,5,6, resulting in a substantial elevation in global atmospheric nitrogen deposition over the last 100 years7. Nitrate (NO3−), an essential nutrient in terrestrial and marine ecosystems, is the main oxidation product of NOx and is therefore considered its primary sink8. After NOx is converted into NO3− in the atmosphere, it can enter surface and marine environments through dry and wet deposition, significantly impacting land and marine productivity and carbon biological pumps9,10. The ocean is the largest active carbon reservoir on Earth, with enormous carbon sequestration potential11,12. Atmospheric nitrogen deposition has been widely demonstrated to play an extremely important role in global ocean productivity and biochar pumping, especially under global warming9,13,14. The contribution of atmospheric nitrogen deposition becomes more significant because warming strengthens ocean stratification, decreasing nutrient supply from deep water to the upper ocean15. However, the mechanism and rate of NO3− formation in the global-scale marine boundary layer remain uncertain, which greatly limits our ability to predict the effects of the lifetimes of NOx and their oxidation products on marine ecology and global climate change.
Atmospheric NOx and its derived nitrogen-compounds deposited on the ocean surface originate mainly from continents16,17 as direct NOx emissions from the ocean are negligible1. Therefore, comprehensively understanding the fate of NOx over the marine atmospheric boundary layer (MABL) is critical, which can not only develop more effective mitigation strategies but also further evaluate the impact of their oxidation products on marine ecosystems. Several oxidation pathways act for NO3− formation from NOx in the atmosphere (Supplementary Text 1). Globally, ozone (O3) and hydroxyl radical (OH) oxidation are the two dominant pathways that convert NOx to NO3−, and account for approximately 41% of the total NO3− generation18,19. In addition, other oxidants such as BrO, hydrocarbons (HC), and dimethyl sulphide (DMS) are regionally important19. On a global scale, the distribution of these oxidations is non-uniform, particularly between the northern (NH) and southern (SH) hemispheres20,21. Furthermore, NOx oxidation differs between daytime (mainly by OH) and night-time (mainly by O3, HC, and DMS). Day length directly affects the formation of OH in the atmosphere and is an important factor affecting atmospheric NO3− formation22. Thus, the NO3−-formation pathways may differ in the two hemispheres. In addition, the NO3− formation efficiencies of different pathways vary greatly, with a higher OH production rate20,23. Therefore, understanding the mechanisms controlling NO3− formation pathways in the global MABL can deepen our understanding of the impact of increased anthropogenic NOx emissions on global marine primary productivity and oceanic CO2 sinks.
The oxygen isotope of nitrate (δ18O-NO3−) provides original information on the nature and relative importance of NOx oxidation pathways for NO3− formation24. Usually, the NO3− produced via the OH pathway is characterised by negative δ18O-NO3− as one-third of oxygen atoms in formed NO3− comes from OH, which characterises negative δ18O (−15~0‰)25. NO3− formed via the O3 pathway has higher δ18O because five-sixth of the oxygen atoms in two formed NO3− come from O3 (90~120‰)26. In addition, NO3− formed via BrO, DMS, or HC exhibits the highest δ18O since these processes originate from the terminal oxygen atom of O3 (~130‰)17. Therefore, the composition of δ18O-NO3− depends on the relative importance of these oxidants in NOx oxidation, enabling researchers to identify and apportion NOx sinks27. Herein, we conducted a total of eight cruises covering the Pacific, Indian, Atlantic, Arctic, and Southern Oceans to analyse aerosol NO3− and its oxygen isotope (δ18O-NO3-) in the MABL to present a comprehensive understanding of the NO3− formation mechanism (removal of NOx) over the global ocean.
Results
Characteristics of NO3 − and δ18O-NO3 − in global marine aerosols
For the Indian Ocean, Northwest Pacific Ocean, and Arctic cruises, NO3− concentrations and δ18O-NO3− compositions ranged from 0.5 to 217.0 nmol m−3 and 53.3 to 91.8‰, respectively (Supplementary Table 1). Globally, the aerosol NO3− concentrations have wide variation (0.2–467.2 nmol m−3), with a higher concentration around the coastal areas, particularly in marginal seas of Asia and Europe, and lower concentrations in the open oceans and polar regions (Fig. 1a). Generally, aerosol NO3− concentration in the MABL is higher in the NH (23.9 ± 46.3 nmol m−3), which is more than twice that of the SH (10.9 ± 18.3 nmol m−3) (Fig. 2a).
Fig. 1: The distribution of NO3− concentration and its isotopic composition in the global ocean.
Panels a and b show the distribution characteristics of aerosol NO3− concentrations and δ18O-NO3− values in the global ocean, respectively.
Full size image
Fig. 2: Characteristics of NO3− and its oxygen isotope in oceanic aerosols from the Northern and Southern Hemispheres.
The purple dashed line in a marks the mean value of the Northern Hemisphere and Southern Hemisphere. a Samples with latitudes higher 60° S represent the Southern Ocean, samples with latitudes higher 65° N represent the Arctic ocean, and other oceanic regions are aerosol samples covered by their respective regions in Supplementary Fig. S5. Solid lines in b and c represent the linear regressions, the light pink backgrounds represent the 95% Prediction Band, and the dark pink backgrounds represent the 95% Confidence Band.
Full size image
δ18O-NO3− values varied greatly over the global MABL (Fig. 1b). In the NH, the δ18O-NO3− values generally decreased with latitude, with a significant trend from the mid (30°N) to high latitudes (Fig. 2). The high δ18O-NO3− values occurred in the Northwest Pacific Ocean (mid-low latitudes), and the values gradually decreased toward high latitudes in the Arctic, with low values in the Arctic regions. However, the δ18O-NO3− values showed a different trend in the Eastern Pacific and Atlantic Oceans, with latitudinal increases and low values appearing in the mid-eastern Pacific Ocean (Fig. 1b). The difference in the trend of δ18O-NO3− values in the MABL of NH may be related to the sampling period, which directly determines the major pathway of NO3− formation. Conversely, the δ18O-NO3− values generally exhibited lower values in the low latitudes whereas high values in the high latitudes (Fig. 1b), with a significantly increased trend with latitude (Fig. 2). Additionally, the δ18O-NO3− value in the Southern Ocean (an average of 73.5 ± 7.7‰) is remarkably higher than in the Arctic Ocean (an average of 61.0 ± 5.0‰), reflecting the difference in the oxidants that influence the formation of NO3− between these two polar regions.
Discussion
The obvious difference in variations of δ18O-NO3− values between the NH and SH (Fig. 2) reflected different NO3− production pathways. In the NH, unlike the variation of δ18O-NO3− values (Fig. 2), the distribution of O3 exhibited a decreased trend from higher latitudes to the tropics (Supplementary Fig. 1). Although the O3 values exhibited significant seasonal changes, the decoupling of δ18O-NO3− and O3 (Fig. 3a) suggested that the O3 value and its seasonal variation were not the major factors controlling NO3− formation. Similarly, BrO concentrations generally increase with latitude in both the NH and SH20,28. However, although enhanced BrO occurs in the polar regions, the BrO levels in the high-latitudes of the Arctic are much lower than that of the high-latitudes of the Antarctic28,29. Therefore, BrO is unlikely to be the major factor controlling NO3− formation in the NH. This is also supported by the decoupling of δ18O-NO3− and tropospheric BrO column in the NH (Fig. 3c). Nevertheless, regionally, the BrO pathway can be important for NO3− production19. For example, modelling results have shown that BrO concentrations in the eastern North Pacific and northern North Pacific are higher than those in other regions of the Pacific20, and NO3− generation via the BrO pathway is responsible for the higher δ18O-NO3− values in these regions30. However, this is not the case in the western North Pacific. As the lowest BrO concentration occurred in the western North Pacific20, higher δ18O-NO3− values were observed in this region (Fig. 1b).
Fig. 3: Correlation of δ18O-NO3− values with ozone, BrO and day length in the Northern and Southern Hemispheres.
Panels a–f show the relationship between δ18O-NO3− and O3 (a and b), BrO (c and d), and day length (e and f), respectively. The monthly average O3 from 2006 to 2021 (the time range of all field observation cruises) for eight latitude bands (0–10°N, 10–30°N, 30–60°N, 60–90°N, 0–10°S, 10–30°S, 30–60°S, and 60–90°S) were obtained from National Aeronautics and Space Administration Ozone Watch (NASA Ozone Watch, https://ozonewatch.gsfc.nasa.gov/). The correlation between δ18O-NO3− and O3 is the average O3 value in a certain latitude range (one out of the eight bands) in a specific month corresponds to the average δ18O-NO3− value in that latitude range during that month. The monthly average BrO for eight latitude bands were obtained from the GOME-2 satellite instrument28 and the data presented by Schmidt et al.20. Each sample corresponds to a day length value according to the sampling date and latitude. Solid lines represent the linear regressions and the light shading represents the 95% confidence intervals.
Full size image
NO3- formation via the OH pathway likely dominated that of NH. The OH concentrations in the atmosphere mainly depend on the length of the day (duration of formation through daytime and night-time reactions) because the OH is a photolytic product31,32. Thus, OH formation exhibits seasonality proportional to the solar radiation intensity (day length), and OH concentrations in the tropics are remarkably