Journals & Books
Help
Search
My account
Sign in
Access through your institution
Purchase PDF
Article preview
Abstract
Introduction
Section snippets
References (30)
Cited by (76)
Food Chemistry
Volume 134, Issue 2
, 15 September 2012, Pages 647-654
Effects of ozone on functional properties of proteins
Author links open overlay panel
Hicran Uzun
,
Esra Ibanoglu
,
Hatice Catal
,
Senol Ibanoglu
Show more
Add to Mendeley
Share
Cite
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foodchem.2012.02.146
Get rights and content
Abstract
The present study investigates whether the ozone treatment could be an alternative to improve some functional properties of proteins. Ozone treatment was applied on whey protein isolate and egg white proteins which have been extensively used in food products to improve textural, functional and sensory attributes. Ozone treatment of proteins was performed either in aqueous solutions or as gas ozonation of pure protein powders. Foam formation and foam stability of proteins were enhanced extensively. The solubility of proteins were reduced as influenced from the aqueous and gas ozonation medium. The reduction was more pronounced in egg white proteins. Ozone treatment affected emulsion activity of whey protein isolate negatively and reduced the emulsion stability.
Highlights
► Ozone treatment resulted in oxidation of proteins with altered functional properties. ► Ozone in the form of gas and aqueous phase was applied on the proteins. ► Foaming stability and activity of the proteins increased with ozone treatment. ► Ozonation affected solubility and emulsifying properties of proteins negatively. ► Ozonated dilute emulsions exhibited more liquid like behaviour at low frequencies.
Introduction
Ozone is a powerful oxidising agent known since 1997 as GRASS (generally recognised as safe) (Kim, Yousef, & Dave, 1999). Ozone use may have many advantages in the food industry. There are suggested applications of ozone in the food industry such as food surface hygiene, sanitation of food plant equipment, reuse of waste water, and lowering biological oxygen demand (BOD) and chemical oxygen demand (COD) of food plant waste (Liangji, 1999).
Ozone reacts with proteins and causes the oxidation of the polypeptide backbone of the protein, peptide bond cleavage, protein–protein cross-linking and a range of amino acid side chain modifications (Kelly & Mudway, 2003). Several studies has been carried out to investigate the basic interaction of ozone with different proteins (Cataldo, 2003, Cataldo, 2004, Cataldo, 2007) and the interactions of specific amino acids in proteins such as methionine in glycophorin (Banerjee & Mudd, 1992), histidine in glutamine synthetase (Berlett, Levine, & Stadtman, 1996), tryptophan in band III, serum albumin, and cyctochrome c (Mudd, Dawson, Tseng, & Liu, 1997). Although all amino acids are potential targets for oxidation by reactive oxygen, the major aromatic amino acids tyrosine, tryptophan, phenylalanine, the sulphur containing amino acids cysteine, methionine as well as the aliphatic amino acids arginine, lysine, proline and histidine appear especially sensitive to oxidation. The sequence of amino acids that are condensed in a chain by amide bonds, representing main chain backbone of proteins exhibits negligible or very limited chain scission during ozonation. Helices, sheets, coils, and folded branches which define the secondary and tertiary structure of proteins seems to be modified by the reaction of ozone with proteins. The action of ozone converts the thiol group of cysteine into disulphides which denature the protein and change its solubility (Kelly & Mudway, 2003). As a result of ozone attack the protein molecules undergo changes in their visual folding and binding ability (Cataldo, 2003) which influence their functionality.
Although basic scientific explanation is available in relation to the action of ozone on proteins, little is known about the change in functional properties of proteins in food systems after ozonolysis. In the present work, we report our basic research results on the action of ozone on functional properties of food proteins such as emulsifying and foaming ability. Proteins, as macromolecules, perform important roles in functionality in food systems. Therefore, the growing demand for proteins as important ingredients in formulated food or in pharmaceutical and industrial mixtures has created a necessity for proteins with specific and consistent functional properties. Proteins exhibit many functional properties governed by their physicochemical activities in a bulk liquid phase (Nakai & Chan, 1985). The results of the present work on the action of ozone on functional properties of proteins may be extrapolated to understand the behaviour of functional ingredients ranging from the situation where ozone is used for cold sterilisation of complex food systems to the case where ozone is used to improve the protein functionality.
In the present work, whey protein isolate (WPI) and egg white proteins were chosen since they are widely used as functional ingredients in many food products. Whey proteins are used as food ingredients because of their unique functional characteristics like emulsifying, gelling, thickening, foaming and water binding capacity (Kinsella & Whitehead, 1989). As foodstuffs they are applied not only because of their functional properties, but also because of their high nutritive value and GRAS status. Egg white proteins have been extensively used as ingredients in processed foods, besides being desirable ingredients in many foods, such as bakery products, pies, cookies, and meat by-products due to the unique functional properties of proteins, such as gel and foam formation (Wong, Herald, & Hachmeister, 1996). Thus, whey protein isolate and egg white proteins were used to investigate the action of ozone on the protein functionality such as solubility, emulsifying and foaming ability. Furthermore, the rheological behaviour of emulsions stabilised whey protein isolate was also investigated to determine the effects of ozone on the viscoelastic behaviour of emulsions.
Section snippets
Materials
Powdered whey protein isolates (98%) (WPI, BIOPRO, Lot No. JE 030-3-420) was obtained from Davisco Foods International (Le Sueur, MN, USA). Hen egg albumen powder (sample No. 1392) (egg white) were kindly supplied from NIVE (Nederlandse Industrie van Eiproducten, Holland). Buffer salts, potassium dihydrogen orthophosphate, disodium hydrogen orthophosphate and sodium dodecyl sulphate (SDS) were purchased from Analar analytical reagent; BDH Chemical Ltd. Sodium chloride (JT Baker), sodium
Foaming properties
Fig. 1A shows the effects of ozone gas on the foaming properties of WPI. The results indicated the change in foam volume and foam stability of WPI after protein treatment with various concentrations of ozone gas in an aqueous solution. The figure shows a dramatic change in the foam volume and foam stability when the WPI was treated with ozone. The effect of different ozone concentrations on foam volume and foam stability of protein were found to be significantly different (p < 0.05). Both,
Conclusions
There is a growing interest to enhance the functional properties of proteins. This facilitates imparting the desirable features to a wide range of food products including appearance, texture and consistency. Also it may provide the requirements for new products, increase the quality of existing food foams and emulsions and facilitates the dispersion of flavours in food systems. Our study has shown that ozone treatment influence the functional properties of protein as a result of structural
References (30)
S.K. Banerjee et al.
Reaction of ozone with glycophorin in solution and in lipid vesiclles
Archives of Biochemistry and Biophysics
(1992)
B.S. Berlett et al.
Comparison of the effects of ozone on the modification of amino acid residues in glutamine synthetase and bovine serum albumin
Journal of Biological Chemistry
(1996)
F. Cataldo
On the action of ozone on proteins
Polymer Degradation and Stability
(2003)
F. Cataldo
On the action of ozone on mathaemoglobin
Polymer Degradation and Stability
(2004)
F. Cataldo
On the action of ozone on gelatin
International Journal of Biological macromolecules
(2007)
E. Dickinson et al.
Foam stabilization by protein–polysaccharide complexes
Colloids and Surfaces A
(1996)
A.R. Jambrak et al.
Physical properties of ultrasound treated soy proteins
Journal of Food Engineering
(2009)
J.G. Kim et al.
Application of ozone for enhancing the microbiological safety and quality of foods: A review
Journal of Food Protection
(1999)
J.B. Mudd et al.
Reaction of ozone with protein tryptophans: Band III, serum albumin and cytochrome c
Archives of Biochemistry and Biophysics
(1997)
S. Nakai et al.
Structure modification and functionality of whey proteins: Quantitative structure-activity relationship approach
Journal of Dairy Science
(1985)
View more references
Cited by (76)
Continuous operation of nano-catalytic ozonation using membrane separation coupling system: Influence factors and mechanism
2024, Chemosphere
Show abstract
Evaluation of the effect of ozone disinfection on forensic identification of blood, saliva, and semen stains
2024, Science and Justice
Show abstract
Insights into coagulation, softening and ozonation pre-treatments for reverse osmosis membrane fouling control in reclamation of textile secondary effluent
2024, Journal of Water Process Engineering
Show abstract
Microalgal consortium tolerance to bisphenol A and triclosan in wastewater and their effects on growth, biomolecule content and nutrient removal
2023, Ecotoxicology and Environmental Safety
Show abstract
The impact of ozone treatment on whey concentrate on the flow behaviour, functional and microbiological characteristics of whey powder
2022, International Dairy Journal
Show abstract
Removal of antibiotics from milk via ozonation in a vortex reactor
2022, Journal of Hazardous Materials
Show abstract
View all citing articles on Scopus
View full text
Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
Recommended articles
Delineating the effect of gaseous ozone on disinfestation efficacy, protein quality, dehulling efficiency, cooking time and surface morphology of chickpea grains during storage
Journal of Stored Products Research, Volume 93, 2021, Article 101823
Nickhil C, …, Krishna Kumar Singh
Tripping up Trp: Modification of protein tryptophan residues by reactive oxygen species, modes of detection, and biological consequences
Free Radical Biology and Medicine, Volume 89, 2015, pp. 220-228
Marilyn Ehrenshaft, …, Ronald P. Mason
Effect of moderate electric field pretreatment in combination with ozonation on inactivation of K12 in intact shell eggs
LWT, Volume 127, 2020, Article 109338
David R. Kasler, …, Sudhir K. Sastry
Show 3 more articles
Article Metrics
Citations
Citation Indexes:
74
Captures
Readers:
99
Social Media
Shares, Likes & Comments:
4
View details
About ScienceDirect
Remote access
Shopping cart
Advertise
Contact and support
Terms and conditions
Privacy policy
Cookies are used by this site.
Cookie Settings
All content on this site: Copyright © 2024 Elsevier B.V., its licensors, and contributors. All rights are reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. For all open access content, the Creative Commons licensing terms apply.
We use cookies that are necessary to make our site work. We may also use additional cookies to analyze, improve, and personalize our content and your digital experience. For more information, see ourCookie Policy
Cookie Settings
Accept all cookies