Register
Login
Global Journal of Environmental Science and Management
7.9
CiteScore
3.1
Impact Factor
Home Correlation between meteorological variables, air quality, and the Coronavirus-19 pandemic events
Browse
GJESM Journal Best Paper Awards
Journal Informations
Authorship
Submit Manuscript
Indexing and Abstracting
Editorial Board
Guide for Authors
Publication Ethics
Editor Page
Review Page
Open Access Policy
Self-Archiving Policy
Privacy Statement
Publisher Business Model
Contact Us
Correlation between meteorological variables, air quality, and the Coronavirus-19 pandemic events
Articles in Press
Document Type : CASE STUDY
Authors
M. Gidarjati T. Matsumoto
Graduate School of Environmental Engineering, University of Kitakyushu, Kitakyushu, Japan
10.22034/gjesm****04.28
Abstract
BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: The study explores the complex relationship between meteorological variables, air quality, and Coronavirus-19 pandemic events in Jakarta, emphasizing the global concern over air pollution's detrimental effects on both health and the economy. It emphasizes the correlation between climate change and exacerbating air pollution by changing weather patterns and meteorological conditions, leading to elevated levels of pollution. Additionally, the study underscores the impact of the Coronavirus-19 pandemic on air quality, with lockdowns temporarily reducing emissions but also revealing the complex interplay between climate change, agricultural practices, and air pollution spikes. The ongoing challenges in improving air quality persist despite the government's efforts, highlighting the need for a thorough understanding of the situation to inform effective policy interventions and strategies for reducing emissions.
METHODS: The study analyzed key pollutants from five monitoring stations in Jakarta including particulate matter 2.5 from a Swiss air quality technology company. Meteorological data (temperature, rainfall, wind speed, humidity, and sunshine hours) were sourced from the Indonesian Agency for Meteorology, Climatology, and Geophysics for the period 2018-2021. The restriction measures and case data pertaining to the Coronavirus disease-19 were acquired from Health Office in Jakarta. Data analysis utilized Microsoft excel and statistical package for the social sciences software, with spearman correlation tests due to non-normal distribution. This empirical approach investigated the associations among air pollutants, meteorological factors, and occurrences of Coronavirus disease-19 in Jakarta, Indonesia.
FINDINGS: Positive linear elationships were identified between the concentrations of particulate matter 10, particulate matter 2.5, carbon monoxide, and nitrogen dioxide. Conversely, a negative linear correlation was observed between carbon monoxide and ozone levels. Nonlinear correlations also existed between various pollutants. During the pandemic, carbon monoxide, nitrogen monoxide and sulphur dioxide concentrations increased, whereas particulate matter 2.5 and ozone levels decreased. Air quality parameters were generally higher in the dry season. Throughout the pandemic, the temperature and wind speed exhibited a consistent pattern, remaining stable. However, it is noteworthy that the levels of humidity and intensity of rainfall experienced a noticeable increase during this period. Particulate matter exhibited a negative correlation with both humidity and rainfall, whereas temperature displayed positive correlations. Despite improved air quality during the pandemic, the link between air pollutants, meteorological factors, and Coronavirus disease-19 transmission was unclear, with only weak correlations between air quality parameters and Coronavirus-19 related deaths. Moderate correlations were observed between specific levels of pollutants prior to and amidst the pandemic.
CONCLUSION: Based on the findings, there was a weak correlation between confirmed deaths because of Coronavirus-19 and all air quality parameters.  Nevertheless, the study showcased a more distinct association between confirmed cases of Coronavirus-19 and particular pollutants. Coronavirus-19 This study identified several key meteorological variables, including wind speed, direction, temperature, humidity, and rainfall, as significant drivers of particulate matter and sulphur dioxide concentrations. It is essential to comprehend the intricate connections among meteorological factors, air quality indicators, and occurrences of Coronavirus disease-19 in order to formulate efficient public health measures and environmental regulations aimed at safeguarding communities from the impacts of air pollution and infectious diseases. 
Graphical Abstract
Highlights
In Jakarta, a tropical country, there was a weak correlation between COVID-19 deaths and all air quality parameters, but clearer correlation between positive COVID-19 cases and specific pollutants;
It explores the interplay between meteorological variables, air quality and COVID-19 transmission, shedding light on potential factors influencing virus spread;
The novelty lies in the comparison of air quality data from pre-pandemic and pandemic years, offering good understanding of environmental changes during COVID-19 period;
The study highlights the significance of weather conditions, pollution levels, and mobility restrictions in shaping air quality dynamics in an urban setting like Jakarta.
Keywords
Air pollution air quality Coronavirus disease-19 (COVID-19) pandemic meteorological variables
Main Subjects
Environmental pollution (Air, soil, water and noise)
OPEN ACCESS
©2024 The author(s). This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons license, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons license, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons license and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this license, visit: 
http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/
  PUBLISHER NOTE
GJESM Publisher remains neutral concerning jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
  CITATION METRICS & CAPTURES
Google Scholar | Scopus | Web of Science | PlumX Metrics | Altmetrics | Mendeley |
  CURRENT PUBLISHER
GJESM Publisher
References
Letters to Editor
GJESM Journal welcomes letters to the editor for the post-publication discussions and corrections which allows debate post publication on its site, through the Letters to Editor. Letters pertaining to manuscript published in GJESM should be sent to the editorial office of GJESM within three months of either online publication or before printed publication, except for critiques of original research. Following points are to be considering before sending the letters (comments) to the editor.

[1] Letters that include statements of statistics, facts, research, or theories should include appropriate references, although more than three are discouraged.
[2] Letters that are personal attacks on an author rather than thoughtful criticism of the author’s ideas will not be considered for publication.
[3] Letters can be no more than 300 words in length.
[4] Letter writers should include a statement at the beginning of the letter stating that it is being submitted either for publication or not.
[5] Anonymous letters will not be considered.
[6] Letter writers must include their city and state of residence or work.
[7] Letters will be edited for clarity and length.

Send comment about this article
Name *
Email Address *
Affiliation *
Comments *
Security Code *
Send Comment

Articles in Press, Accepted Manuscript
Available Online from 13 June 2024
Files
XML
PDF 2.5 M
History
Receive Date: 05 February 2024
Revise Date: 13 April 2024
Accept Date: 13 June 2024
Share
How to cite
Statistics
Article View: 82
PDF Download: 11
Home
About Journal
Editorial Board
Submit Manuscript
Contact Us
Sitemap
News
Corresponding author ORCID 2019-06-06
Cooperation with GJESM Journal 2019-06-06
The GJESM Editor in Chief is appointed as Journal Advisor ... 2016-01-05
Professor J. Nouri is appointed as as the formal member ... 2016-05-15
GJESM Journal is evaluated as the first rank by the ... 2017-04-13
Global Journal of Environmental Science and Management is licensed under a
"Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International (CC-BY 4.0)"
Newsletter Subscription
Subscribe to the journal newsletter and receive the latest news and updates
Subscribe
© Journal Management System. Powered by Journal Manager.