Your privacy, your choice
We use essential cookies to make sure the site can function. We, and our 209 partners, also use optional cookies and similar technologies for advertising, personalisation of content, usage analysis, and social media.
By accepting optional cookies, you consent to allowing us and our partners to store and access personal data on your device, such as browsing behaviour and unique identifiers. Some third parties are outside of the European Economic Area, with varying standards of data protection. See our privacy policy for more information on the use of your personal data. Your consent choices apply to springer.com and applicable subdomains.
You can find further information, and change your preferences via 'Manage preferences'.
You can also change your preferences or withdraw consent at any time via 'Your privacy choices', found in the footer of every page.
We use cookies and similar technologies for the following purposes:
Store and/or access information on a device
Personalised advertising and content, advertising and content measurement, audience research and services development
Accept all cookies
Reject optional cookies
Manage preferences
Skip to main content
Advertisement
Log in
Find a journal
Publish with us
Track your research
Search
Cart
Home BMC Public Health Article
Short-term exposure to air pollution on peripheral white blood cells and inflammation biomarkers: a cross-sectional study on rural residents
Research
Open access
Published: 26 June 2024
Volume 24, article number 1702, (2024)
Cite this article
Download PDF
You have full access to this
open access
article
BMC Public Health
Aims and scope
Submit manuscript
Yishu Yang, Hui Wu, Yuling Zeng, Fei Xu, Shuaiqi Zhao, Ling Zhang, Zhen An, Huijun Li, Juan Li, Jie Song & Weidong Wu 
478 Accesses
12 Altmetric
1 Mention
Explore all metrics
Abstract
Effects of short-term exposure to ambient air pollution on systemic immunological and inflammatory biomarkers in rural population have not been adequately characterized. From May to July 2021, 5816 participants in rural villages of northern Henan Province, China, participated in this cross-sectional study. Blood biomarkers of systemic inflammation were determined including peripheral white blood cells (WBC), eosinophils (EOS), basophils (BAS), monocytes (MON), lymphocytes (LYM), neutrophils (NEU), neutrophil-lymphocyte ratio (NLR), and serum high-sensitivity C-reactive protein (hs-CRP). The concentrations of ambient fine particulate matter (PM2.5), PM10, nitrogen dioxide (NO2), carbon monoxide (CO), and ozone (O3) were assessed up to 7 days prior to the blood draw. A generalized linear model was used to analyze the associations between air pollution exposure and the above-mentioned blood biomarkers. Significantly positive associations were revealed between PM2.5, CO and WBC; CO, O3 and LYM; PM2.5, PM10, SO2, CO and NEU; PM2.5, PM10, SO2, CO and NLR; PM2.5, PM10, SO2, NO2, CO, O3 and hs-CRP. Meanwhile, negative associations were found between SO2 and WBC; PM2.5, PM10, NO2, CO, or O3 and EOS; PM2.5, SO2, or CO and BAS; SO2, NO2 or O3 and MON; PM2.5, PM10, SO2, or NO2 and LYM. Moreover, men, individuals with normal body mass index (BMI), current smokers, and those older than 60 years were found vulnerable to air pollution effects. Taken together, short-term exposure to air pollution was associated with systemic inflammatory responses, providing insight into the potential mechanisms for air pollution-induced detrimental systemic effects in rural residents.
View this article's peer review reports
Similar content being viewed by others
Association of ambient air pollution with hemoglobin levels and anemia in the general population of Korean adults
Article Open access
09 April 2024
The Wuhan-Zhuhai (WHZH) cohort study of environmental air particulate matter and the pathogenesis of cardiopulmonary diseases: study design, methods and baseline characteristics of the cohort
Article Open access
24 September 2014
Associations between short-term exposure to ambient air pollution and lung function in adults
Article 13 May 2023
Introduction
Air pollution is a major environmental threat to human health worldwide and has been shown to be associated with a wide range of adverse health outcomes. Previous epidemiological studies have shown that exposure to air pollution leads to a variety of adverse health outcomes, including cardiorespiratory and autoimmune diseases, and can even increase mortality in the population [1,2,3,4]. Many pathophysiological alterations, such as inflammation, oxidative stress, and immunological disorders, have been attributed to air pollution exposure [5, 6]. Documented studies have indicated that air pollutants are capable of stimulating airway epithelial cells and immune cells, resulting in airway epithelial damage and detrimental effects beyond the lung, including systemic immunological and inflammatory responses [7,8,9,10].
One of the primary systemic inflammatory responses is the stimulation of the haematopoietic system to release leukocytes and platelets into the circulation. Previous studies have shown that leukocytes are a reliable predictor for air pollution-induced short- and long-term health effects [11,12,13]. Epidemiological investigations have discovered the relationships between short-term exposure to ambient air pollutants and the alterations of peripheral white blood cells in urban populations, such as peripheral white blood cells (WBC), eosinophils (EOS), basophils (BAS), monocytes (MON), lymphocytes (LYM), and neutrophils (NEU), neutrophil/lymphocyte ratio (NLR) [13,14,15]. In particular, NLR responds to the dynamic changes in neutrophils and lymphocytes and can be applied to quantify the dynamic action of cellular innate and adaptive immune responses, being considered as a new perspective marker of and a valid indicator of systemic inflammation [16,17,18]. Thus far, the association of short-term air pollution exposure with NLR has been less characterized, with no evidence available for rural populations. In addition, high-sensitivity C-reactive protein (hs-CRP), a simple, rapid and cost-effective biomarker of systemic inflammation [18], has been widely utilized to assess health effects of short-term air pollution exposure due to its high sensitivity, but the existing evidence appears inconsistent [19,20,21].
Xinxiang is located north of Henan province, one of the most populous provinces and the top region by rural population in China, and is one of the regions in the country with severe air pollution [22]. Noteworthy, the population in this present study was living in a typical and modern rural area with traditional agriculture and community-managed industries. This represents the new trend of village development (rural revitalization) in modern China. Thus, the findings from this study could apply to other rural areas in Henan province or part of other provinces. Therefore, it is of practical significance to evaluate health consequences of air pollution on rural dwellers in this developing regions. Given that systemic inflammation is a common and essential event in the pathogenesis of many diseases, examination of blood biomarkers for systemic inflammation is crucial to identify early alterations of adverse health effects and take measures to prevent progression of diverse noncommunicable chronic diseases. It should also be noted that examination of white blood cells as well as soluble biomarkers of systemic inflammation was an indispensable part of the funded national project which supported this present study. In this context, the aim of this present study was to evaluate the effects of short-term exposure to ambient air pollution on peripheral white blood cells and serumm biomarker for systemic inflammattion in the rural population of Xinxiang, and to provide clues for design of preventive and therapeutic strategies.
Methods
Study participants
5816 participants were finally recruited in rural villages of Xinxiang from May to July 2021. Trained investigators employed standardized questionnaires to gather individual data, such as demographic characteristics, lifestyle habits, and disease history. Smoking, drinking, and physical activities were specified as previously reported [23]. Herein, smoking was defined as a minimum of one cigarette a day for more than 6 months; drinking as consuming alcohol 12 or more times annually, and physical activity levels as high, moderate, and low based on the physical activity-metabolic equivalent. The disease status of the participants was designated by the Charlson Comorbidity Index (CCI) [24]. Body mass index (BMI) was calculated as the ratio of body weight in kilograms(kg) divided by the square of height in meters (m2). The Ethics Committee of Xinxiang Medical University for Human Studies authorized this investigation (XYLL-2,016,242). Moreover, the informed consent was given willingly and in writing by each participant.
Estimation of air pollution exposures
Ambient air pollutant concentrations included the 24-h average concentrations of PM2.5 (particulate matter with a diameter of 2.5 μm and less), PM10, nitrogen dioxide (NO2), sulfur dioxide (SO2), carbon monoxide (CO), and the daily maximum 8-h average concentrations of ozone (O3) from May 26 to July 20, 2021, were obtained from Xinxiang Environmental Monitoring Station. The distance between the participant’s dwellings and the environmental monitoring site was less than 10 km. The daily average temperature and relative humidity was obtained from the China Meteorological Data Network. In addition to single-day lag models (lag0 to lag7), moving average lag models (lag01 and lag07) were also used to assess the impacts of air pollution exposure.
Measurements of peripheral blood biomarkers
15.0 ml peripheral venous blood was drawn by medical staff from each participant fasting for at least 8 h. 10.0 ml of blood was put into an anticoagulant-treated tube and gently mixed before cell counting. The other 5.0 ml of blood was drained into a tube without anticoagulant treatment and sat for 30–60 min at room temperature to collect serum for hs-CRP measurement. WBC, EOS, BAS, MON, LYM, and NEU were counted using an automated hematology analyzer (XS-500i, Sysmex Corporation, Kobe, Japan) and NLR calculated. Serum hs-CRP was measured using an automated clinical chemistry analyzer (CS-2000, Dirui Industrial, China). The biomarkers were examined by a certified clinical laboratory with standardized operating and quality control procedures.
Statistical analyses
Continuous variables’ normal and non-normal distributions were presented, respectively, as mean (standard deviation) and median (interquartile range); categorical variables were expressed as number (percentage).
The association between exposure to air pollution and meteorological factors were assessed by Spearman correlation analyses. The short-term impact of ambient air pollution on blood biomarkers was evaluated using multivariable linear regression models. To assess the lag-associated effects of air pollution exposure, the model incorporated a spectrum of lagged, including single-day lags and moving averages of multiple lagged days (lag0-7, 01–07). Blood biomarker values were normalized using log10 transformation before being included into the models. Those estimated effects were displayed as a percentage change (95% CI) for every 10 µg/m3 increasing concentration of each air pollutant.
For each air pollutant, its effect on a single biomarker was evaluated individually. The air pollution exposure model was adjusted for age, BMI, and category-type variables including sex, villages, marital, smoking and drinking status, education, average monthly income, and physical activity levels, CCI, allergy, and meteorological factors including temperature and relative humidity. For the latter, only those lag dates that produced minimum moving average values of Akaike Information Criterion (AIC) were selected.
To investigate the confounding effects of sex (male vs. female), BMI (< 24 vs. ≥ 24 kg/m2), smoking status (current smoker, never or former smokers), and age (≥ 60 vs. < 60 years) on the relationship between air pollution exposure and blood biomarkers, stratification analyses were preformed. To verify the robustness of the estimated effects and allow for the adjustment of co-pollutants, sensitivity analyses were carried out with two-pollutant models.
R software (version 4.1.3) was used for all data analyses, and the “ggplot2” package was used to visualize data. The threshold for statistical significance was set at P < 0.05.
Results
Demographic characteristics of the participants
Demographic characteristics and blood biomarkers of the participants are presented in Table 1. In this study, 2157 males (37.1%) and 3659 females (62.9%) with an average age of 57.79 years and BMI of 25.59 kg/m2 were recruited. Of 5816 subjects, 16.5% were current smokers and 77.6% former smokers; 63.8% had high physical activity and 31.5% moderate activity. The median counts for WBC, EOS, BAS, MON, LYM, and NEU were 5.97 × 109/L, 0.09 × 109/L, 0.03 × 109/L, 0.27 × 109/L, 1.98 × 109/L, and 3.48 × 109/L, respectively, and the median of NLR was 1.7%. Meanwhile, the mean serum level of hs-CRP was 2.04 mg/L.
Table 1 Descriptive characteristics and blood biomarkers of the participants
Full size table
Correlations of ambient air pollutants and meteorological variables
Table 2 shows the distribution of air pollutant concentrations and meteorological variables over the survey period. The median levels of PM2.5, PM10, SO2, NO2, O3, and CO were 24.50 (8.0–65.0), 56.50 (20.0-148.0), 10.00 (2.0–16.0), 19.00 (7.0–37.0), 86.00 (39.6–68.0) µg/m3 and 0.60 (0.3–1.3) µg/m3, respectively. PM2.5 and PM10 concentrations were above the current World Health Organization’s air quality guidelines. In addition, the median temperature and relative humidity were 28.10 (23.3–31.7) ℃ and 64.5 (26–100) %, respectively.
Table 2 Summary statistics for air pollutant concentrations and meteorological variables during the study period
Full size table
The associations of air pollutant concentrations with meteorological factors were assessed with Spearman correlation analyses. The varied correlations were shown in