Loading [MathJax]/jax/output/HTML-CSS/config.js
Your privacy, your choice
We use essential cookies to make sure the site can function. We, and our 209 partners, also use optional cookies and similar technologies for advertising, personalisation of content, usage analysis, and social media.
By accepting optional cookies, you consent to allowing us and our partners to store and access personal data on your device, such as browsing behaviour and unique identifiers. Some third parties are outside of the European Economic Area, with varying standards of data protection. See our privacy policy for more information on the use of your personal data. Your consent choices apply to nature.com and applicable subdomains.
You can find further information, and change your preferences via 'Manage preferences'.
You can also change your preferences or withdraw consent at any time via 'Your privacy choices', found in the footer of every page.
We use cookies and similar technologies for the following purposes:
Store and/or access information on a device
Personalised advertising and content, advertising and content measurement, audience research and services development
Accept all cookies
Reject optional cookies
Manage preferences
Skip to main content
Advertisement
View all journals
Search
Log in
Explore content
About the journal
Publish with us
Sign up for alerts
RSS feed
nature scientific reports articles article
Article
Open access
Published: 10 July 2024
Portable and affordable cold air plasma source with optimized bactericidal effect
Myron Klenivskyi, Josef Khun, Laura Thonová, Eva Vaňková & Vladimír Scholtz 
Scientific Reports
 14, Article number: 15930 (2024) Cite this article
273 Accesses
Metrics
Abstract
The paper reports a low-cost handheld source of a cold air plasma intended for biomedical applications that can be made by anyone (detailed technical information and a step-by-step guide for creating the NTP source are provided). The plasma source employs a 1.4 W corona discharge in the needle-to-cone electrode configuration and is an extremely simple device, consisting basically of two electrodes and a cheap power supply. To achieve the best bactericidal effect, the plasma source has been optimized on Escherichia coli. The bactericidal ability of the plasma source was further tested on a wide range of microorganisms: Staphylococcus aureus as a representative of gram-positive bacteria, Pseudomonas aeruginosa as gram-negative bacteria, Candida albicans as yeasts, Trichophyton interdigitale as microfungi, and Deinococcus radiodurans as a representative of extremophilic bacteria resistant to many DNA-damaging agents, including ultraviolet and ionizing radiation. The testing showed that the plasma source inactivates all the microorganisms tested in several minutes (up to 105–107 CFU depending on a microorganism), proving its effectiveness against a wide spectrum of pathogens, in particular microfungi, yeasts, gram-positive and gram-negative bacteria. Studies of long-lived reactive species such as ozone, nitrogen oxides, hydrogen peroxide, nitrite, and nitrate revealed a strong correlation between ozone and the bactericidal effect, indicating that the bactericidal effect should generally be attributed to reactive oxygen species. This is the first comprehensive study of the bactericidal effect of a corona discharge in air and the formation of long-lived reactive species by the discharge, depending on both the interelectrode distance and the discharge current.
Similar content being viewed by others
Antibacterial effects of low-temperature plasma generated by atmospheric-pressure plasma jet are mediated by reactive oxygen species
Article Open access
20 February 2020
No-ozone cold plasma can kill oral pathogenic microbes in H2O2-dependent and independent manner
Article Open access
09 May 2022
Low-temperature argon plasma jet with cascading electrode technique for biological applications
Article Open access
11 October 2022
Introduction
A non-thermal plasma (NTP) is an ionized gaseous medium containing highly reactive species that give it special, sought-after properties, such as bactericidal. Particularly significant is that a NTP can eradicate pathogens from delicate items without damaging them1. NTP is rapidly gaining popularity thanks to the great prospects for its use in medicine, biology, ecology, industry, and agriculture2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9,10,11. The demand and promise of a NTP is confirmed by a large number of articles published annually. The areas of application of a NTP are being actively explored and are constantly expanding.
Especially promising is the use of a NTP in medicine12,13,14,15,16,17. NTP has shown its effectiveness in disinfection18,19,20, wound healing21,22,23,24,25,26, tumor suppression27,28,29,30,31, treatment of skin diseases32,33,34,35, oral/dental diseases36,37,38,39, nail fungus40,41, etc. Of particular note is that a NTP can inhibit the growth of biofilms and even antibiotic-resistant bacteria42,43,44,45. Moreover, experiments show no development of bacterial resistance to plasma treatment46,47,48,49,50. Due to the fact that pathogens have been demonstrated to develop resistance to antibiotics51,52,53,54,55,56,57, the study and development of NTP sources as an alternative to traditional drug therapy is of particular importance.
One of the simplest ways to generate a NTP is to ignite an electric discharge in the air. A plasma generated in the air is rich in reactive oxygen species (ROS) and reactive nitrogen species (RNS), which endow the plasma with bactericidal properties46,58,59,60. In fact, a discharge in the air produces quite complex reactive chemistry61,62,63,64. The composition and content of plasma species largely depend on a discharge that generates the plasma. There are various discharges used to produce a NTP65,66,67. Among the most commonly used are atmospheric pressure plasma jets68,69,70, dielectric barrier discharges71,72, resistive barrier discharges73, DC-driven discharges74,75, gliding arc discharges76.
To date, there are a great many articles reporting various NTP sources but most of them are experimental setups that are not adapted for practical use. In fact, most NTP sources used in research are bulky, non-portable, and expensive. Usually, the most expensive part of a plasma source is the high-voltage power supply. However, of particular importance is not only to achieve good results in a laboratory but also to make them available for wide practical use. Due to the high cost of power supplies, NTP sources used for research are impractical in practice. Fortunately, generating a NTP does not require much energy since the high energy deposited per unit volume of a plasma causes it to heat up. A high-voltage power supply with a mean power of several watts is quite enough to generate a NTP61,77. Commercially available DC high-voltage power supplies of low-power are cheap and compact enough to allow the development of a portable and affordable NTP source. The aim of this research was precisely to develop a cheap, handheld, and efficient NTP source for biomedical applications.
It is worth noting that few attempts to create portable NTP sources have been made (e.g.78,79,80,81,82,83,84), but the reported plasma sources use barrier discharges and atmospheric pressure plasma jets, while other types of discharge have not received due attention. However, the use of DC discharges makes it possible to develop much simpler and cheaper NTP sources. This is because an electrode system for a DC discharge is simpler, and DC high-voltage power supplies are cheaper. In addition, DC discharges require no additional measures to transfer active species to the object being processed, which is one of their main advantages. A strong ion wind induced by a DC discharge effectively copes with this task. Thus, there is no need to use any compressed gas or pumping system to create a flow that transfers active species to a treatment object. Note that the term “ion wind” refers to a flow of air resulting from the transfer of momentum to neutral air molecules when colliding with ions accelerated by an electric field.
Unfortunately, surface barrier discharges have a low mass-transfer of plasma species so the treatment object must be in contact with the discharge. This makes it difficult to process objects of complex geometry, in particular, with holes or with a concave/convex surface. Ni et al.78 managed to create a flow of plasma species directed perpendicularly from the surface barrier discharge using a special geometry of the electrodes. Unfortunately, an increase in the flow speed is accompanied by a decrease in the effective area of the surface barrier discharge, which negatively affects the efficiency of the NTP source. As for a volume dielectric barrier discharge, it has a fixed discharge gap, which imposes restrictions on the size of objects being processed. Moreover, an object introduced into the discharge gap can affect the discharge operation.
As far as atmospheric pressure plasma jets are concerned, they are free from the above disadvantages and can be used to process objects of arbitrary geometry. However, atmospheric pressure plasma jets require a gas supply usually provided by cylinders with compressed feed gases81 or a system pumping the air through the discharge79,82. This makes such NTP sources more complex, expensive, and less portable.
It should be noted that we reported two portable NTP sources based on DC discharges85. The first plasma source uses a so-called cometary discharge86,87 formed in a needle-to-needle electrode configuration. Despite the advantages and well-pronounced bactericidal effect85,86,87,88,89,90,91,92,93, the cometary discharge is not stable enough and can switch to another discharge mode. Because of this, the discharge requires constant monitoring and adjustment, which make it difficult to use this NTP source in practice.
In contrast to the plasma source based on the cometary discharge, the second one uses a corona discharge formed in a needle-to-cone electrode configuration and is highly reliable in operation85. The conical electrode makes it easy to transfer plasma species through the electrode to the treatment object by means of the ion wind induced by the discharge. In fact, the second NTP source is extremely simple and it is just a corona discharge and a high-voltage power supply placed in a handheld plastic case. However, the development of not just a portable and affordable, but at the same time an efficient NTP source has not been given due attention, which is what this research is dedicated to.
Thus, the research aims to develop a simple, handheld, and low-cost NTP source based on a corona discharge in air with an optimized bactericidal effect. For this purpose, a comprehensive study of the bactericidal and physical properties of a corona discharge in air is carried out. The bactericidal and physical properties of the discharge, as well as the formation of various reactive species by the discharge, are studied depending on two parameters: the interelectrode distance and the discharge current. In addition, the bactericidal ability of the optimized discharge is tested on a wide range of pathogens, including microfungi, yeasts, gram-positive and gram-negative bacteria.
Methods and techniques
Description of the NTP source
The NTP source presented in this paper is based on a DC discharge in the needle-to-cone electrode configuration chosen for its advantageous features. One of them is that plasma species are blown out of the conical electrode in a narrow flow thanks to the ion wind induced by the discharge. This feature makes it simple to treat objects of interest just placing them under the conical electrode and at the same time provides a well-pronounced bactericidal effect. Note that a treatment object is placed outside the electrode system, so it does not affect the discharge operation.
A DC discharge usually requires a ballast resistor to be connected in series with the discharge to prevent it from arcing and damaging the power supply. Fortunately, low-cost DC high-voltage power supplies of low-power have high output impedance, so additional ballast resistance can be omitted. The absence of the need for a ballast resistor makes the plasma source an extremely simple device, essentially consisting of two electrodes and a power supply.
The power supply of the NTP source comprises a step-up high-voltage DC/DC converter and a 12 V voltage source. The electrode system consists of a conical electrode and a needle (a Medoject 0.6 mm × 25 mm intramuscular injection needle). The conical electrode was made of brass. It is approximately 11 mm in diameter at the top and 8 mm at the bottom. The electrode system is connected directly to the output of the high-voltage DC/DC converter without a ballast resistor. The needle electrode is connected to the negative terminal of the high-voltage power supply and the conical electrode is connected to the positive one. Detailed technical information and a step-by-step guide for creating the NTP source are available on our website94.
Methods for studying the bactericidal properties of the discharge
To study the properties of the discharge and optimize it for the best bactericidal effect, we used the experimental setup shown schematically in Fig. 1. To regulate the high-voltage across the electrodes, we powered the high-voltage DC/DC converter from a regulated DC low-voltage source. In addition, the needle electrode was mounted on a micrometric linear positioner so that the interelectrode distance could be accurately set.
Figure 1
Experimental setup for studying the bactericidal