Skip to main content
HOMESUBMITFAQBLOGALERTS / RSSRESOURCESABOUT
Search for this keyword
Advanced Search
  Follow this preprint
Mapping smartphone-based eye-tracking behavior across Japanese individuals on the pareidolia test
Gajanan S. Revankar, Kota Furuya, Etsuro Mori, Maki Suzuki, Yoshiyuki Nishio, Issei Ogasawara, Yuki Yamamoto, Abhay M. Aradhya, Abhishek C. Salian, Varad V. Kajarekar, Ashwin M. Jagadeesh, Seema S. Revankar, Arya A. Revankar, Natsuki Yoshida, Chizu Saeki, Tatsuhiko Ozono, Daisaku Nakatani, Hideki Mochizuki, Manabu Ikeda, Ken Nakata
doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.06.20.24308648
This article is a preprint and has not been peer-reviewed [what does this mean?]. It reports new medical research that has yet to be evaluated and so should not be used to guide clinical practice.
0000002
AbstractFull TextInfo/HistoryMetrics
Preview PDF
Abstract
Pareidolias are illusionary phenomena wherein ambiguous forms appear meaningful. In clinical research, pareidolias have been studied using paper or desktop test formats to deconstruct visuo-perceptual mechanisms. Translating this work on to an accessible, scalable setup such as smartphones is currently unknown. Here, we designed a smartphone-based pareidolia test to study visual processes affecting gaze behavior of cognitively healthy individuals using a standard, native front-facing camera. We optimized our system using machine learning and explored the challenges involved in user behavior, demographic specificity, and test functionality. We performed our experiments on 52 healthy Japanese adults, aged between 50 to 80 years who underwent MMSE and the smartphone test for pareidolias. Gaze movements on the 15-min, user-centric evaluation was calibrated to every individual. Results showed test responses with minimal differences with respect to age, sex, and completion time. Personalized calibrations improved the model’s prediction performance and quantification of gaze tracking metrics aligned with that of commercial grade eye-trackers. Our findings demonstrate the applicability and scalability of pareidolia testing on smartphone platforms.
Competing Interest Statement
The authors have declared no competing interest.
Funding Statement
NEDO-NEP 2024 grant; by the AMED Medical Device (AMED-SENTAN) grant, Japan, 2023-2024 (Assignment ID: J230705024); and by the KAKENHI Grant-in-Aid for Early-Career Scientists (Grant number 21K15680).
Author Declarations
I confirm all relevant ethical guidelines have been followed, and any necessary IRB and/or ethics committee approvals have been obtained.
Yes
The details of the IRB/oversight body that provided approval or exemption for the research described are given below:
The Osaka University institution review board cleared the protocol for the study to be performed in the Department of Neurology, Osaka University, Japan in accordance with the ethical standards of the Declaration of Helsinki (IRB Approval number 22307).
I confirm that all necessary patient/participant consent has been obtained and the appropriate institutional forms have been archived, and that any patient/participant/sample identifiers included were not known to anyone (e.g., hospital staff, patients or participants themselves) outside the research group so cannot be used to identify individuals.
Yes
I understand that all clinical trials and any other prospective interventional studies must be registered with an ICMJE-approved registry, such as ClinicalTrials.gov. I confirm that any such study reported in the manuscript has been registered and the trial registration ID is provided (note: if posting a prospective study registered retrospectively, please provide a statement in the trial ID field explaining why the study was not registered in advance).
Yes
I have followed all appropriate research reporting guidelines, such as any relevant EQUATOR Network research reporting checklist(s) and other pertinent material, if applicable.
Yes
Copyright 
The copyright holder for this preprint is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
Back to top
Previous
Next
Posted June 21, 2024.
Download PDF
Print/Save Options
Author Declarations
Supplementary Material
Data/Code
Email
Share
Citation Tools
Get QR code
COVID-19 SARS-CoV-2 preprints from medRxiv and bioRxiv
Subject Area
Psychiatry and Clinical Psychology
Subject Areas
All Articles
Addiction Medicine
Allergy and Immunology
Anesthesia
Cardiovascular Medicine
Dentistry and Oral Medicine
Dermatology
Emergency Medicine
Endocrinology (including Diabetes Mellitus and Metabolic Disease)
Epidemiology
Forensic Medicine
Gastroenterology
Genetic and Genomic Medicine
Geriatric Medicine
Health Economics
Health Informatics
Health Policy
Health Systems and Quality Improvement
Hematology
HIV/AIDS
Infectious Diseases (except HIV/AIDS)
Intensive Care and Critical Care Medicine
Medical Education
Medical Ethics
Nephrology
Neurology
Nursing
Nutrition
Obstetrics and Gynecology
Occupational and Environmental Health
Oncology
Ophthalmology
Orthopedics
Otolaryngology
Pain Medicine
Palliative Medicine
Pathology
Pediatrics
Pharmacology and Therapeutics
Primary Care Research
Psychiatry and Clinical Psychology
Public and Global Health
Radiology and Imaging
Rehabilitation Medicine and Physical Therapy
Respiratory Medicine
Rheumatology
Sexual and Reproductive Health
Sports Medicine
Surgery
Toxicology
Transplantation
Urology


We use cookies on this site to enhance your user experience. By clicking any link on this page you are giving your consent for us to set cookies.
Continue Find out more