This website uses cookies
We use cookies to personalise content and ads, to provide social media features and to analyse our traffic. We also share information about your use of our site with our social media, advertising and analytics partners who may combine it with other information that you’ve provided to them or that they’ve collected from your use of their services.
Consent Selection
Necessary
Preferences
Statistics
Marketing
Show details
















Deny
Allow selection
Allow all


Journals
Topics Information
Author Services Initiatives
About
Sign In / Sign Up Submit
  Search for Articles:
Biomass
All Article Types
Advanced
  Journals Biomass Volume 4 Issue 2 10.3390/biomass4020027
Submit to this Journal Review for this Journal Propose a Special Issue
Article Menu
Academic Editor
Kit Wayne Chew
Subscribe SciFeed
Recommended Articles
Related Info Link
More by Authors Links
Article Views
398
Table of Contents
Abstract
Introduction
Materials and Methods
Results
Discussion
Conclusions
Supplementary Materials
Author Contributions
Funding
Data Availability Statement
Conflicts of Interest
References
share
Share
announcement
Help
format_quote
Cite
question_answer
Discuss in SciProfiles
thumb_up
Endorse
textsms
Comment
first_page
settings
Order Article Reprints
Open AccessArticle
Environmentally Friendly and Cost-Effective Approaches to Reduce Toxin Content in Toxic Cyanobacterial Biomasses
by Leticia Loss
1, Joana Azevedo
1, Tomé Azevedo
1, Marisa Freitas
1,2, Vitor Vasconcelos
1,3 and Alexandre Campos
1,*
1
CIIMAR, Interdisciplinary Centre of Marine and Environmental Research, Terminal de Cruzeiros do Porto de Leixões, Av. General Norton de Matos s/n, 4450-208 Matosinhos, Portugal
2
ESS, Polytechnic of Porto, Rua Dr. António Bernardino de Almeida, 400, 4200-072 Porto, Portugal
3
Biology Department, Faculty of Sciences, University of Porto, Rua do Campo Alegre s/n, 4169-007 Porto, Portugal
*
Author to whom correspondence should be addressed.
Biomass 2024, 4(2), 518-529; https://doi.org/10.3390/biomass4020027
Submission received: 25 March 2024 / Revised: 4 May 2024 / Accepted: 20 May 2024 / Published: 3 June 2024
Download
keyboard_arrow_down





Browse Figures Review Reports Versions Notes
Abstract
Cyanobacterial outgrowths are naturally occurring processes in eutrophic aquatic ecosystems. Furthermore, as a result of climate change and anthropogenic pollution, cyanobacteria harmful algal blooms (CyanoHABs) are expanding worldwide. CyanoHABs are considered a threat to human health and environment due to the production of potent toxic substances, but at the same time, valuable products can be obtained from these microorganisms. The main objective of this study was to test straightforward and cost-effective methods to reduce the toxin content of cyanobacterial biomass for the exploitation of this important biological resource. To carry out this study, lyophilized or hydrated biomass from microcystin-LR (MC-LR) producing Microcystis aeruginosa and cylindrospermopsin (CYN) producing Chrysosporum ovalisporum strains were subjected to the following treatments: (1) thermal (50 °C); (2) ultraviolet (UV) radiation; (3) ozone; and (4) sunlight, for periods varying between 2 and 12 h. MC-LR and CYN concentrations were quantified by LC-MS and compared between experimental groups. The results show a significant reduction in the amount of MC-LR in M. aeruginosa biomass (lyophilized and hydrated) exposed to sunlight. Since no other treatment reduced MC-LR in M. aeruginosa biomass, this molecule was demonstrated to be very stable. Regarding CYN, the concentration of this toxin in C. ovalisporum biomass was significantly reduced with the exposure to UV radiation, to approximately 51% of the initial concentration after 2 h of exposure; 86% reduction after 5 h of exposure; and 77% reduction after 12 h of exposure. Overall, this study demonstrates that the toxicity of cyanobacterial biomass can be reduced by employing environmentally friendly and cost-effective treatments with sunlight and UV radiation.
Keywords: Microcystis aeruginosa; Chrysosporum ovalisporum; cylindrospermopsin; microcystin-LR; ozone; ultraviolet radiation; sunlight
1. Introduction
Cyanobacteria are known for being the first photosynthetic microorganisms and have been playing an important role in the production of oxygen on Earth in the last 3 billion years [1]. Cyanobacteria are also known as blue-green algae and can be found in a variety of environments from freshwaters and oceans to soil and bare rock [2]. Eutrophication is now recognized as one of the main factors contributing to the geographic expansion of cyanobacteria and the occurrence of toxic strains [3]. Although important, eutrophication is not the only factor triggering the development of cyanobacteria harmful algal blooms (CyanoHABs) and related outbreaks. Anthropogenic pressure and world temperature increase have been playing an important role in CyanoHABs expansion [4]. Among the toxins produced by cyanobacteria, microcystins (MCs) and cylindrospermopsin (CYN) are the most prevalent. These toxins can cause severe harm to animals and humans. MCs constitute the largest and most structurally diverse group of cyanobacterial toxins [5]. MCs are cyclic heptapeptides, comprising L- and D-amino acids and two variable L-amino acids in the positions X and Y of the molecule [6]. The most common congeners are microcystin-LR (MC-LR), microcystin-RR (MC-RR), and microcystin-YR (MC-YR), which have leucine (L), arginine (R), or tyrosine (Y) in positions X and Y of the molecule. The most prevalent and toxic variant is, however, MC-LR [7]. MCs are produced by different genera of cyanobacteria including Microcystis, Planktothrix, and Anabaena [8]. MCs are usually classified as hepatotoxins, since the primary target of MCs in mammals is the liver [9], but it can affect other organs including the colon, kidneys, intestines, lungs, brain, heart, and reproductive system [10]. The cyclic structure of MCs is thought to confer great chemical stability to pH and temperature and to enzymatic digestion [11,12].
Cylindrospermopsin (CYN) is a tricyclic alkaloid cytotoxin, with a molecular weight of 415 Da. The first identification and isolation date back to 1992 [13]. It is considered an emerging global threat due to the increasing distribution of its main producer, Cylindrospermopsis raciborskii [14]. CYN production has also been associated with different cyanobacteria such as Umezakia natans, Aphanizomenon sp., Raphidiopsis curvata, Lyngbya wollei, and Anabaena bergii [15]. The toxin was reported to be stable to UV light, pH, and temperature and has high solubility and mobility in water [16]. Neurotoxicity, hepatotoxicity, cytotoxicity, and carcinogenic effects have been associated with the exposure to this toxin [5,17].
Nonetheless, cyanobacteria have been recognized as important biological resources, from which biochemically active natural substances can be isolated [18]. Many biotechnological applications can be exploited, namely, in the development of novel drugs and treatment of human illnesses, food supplements, cosmetics, antibiotics, environmental friendly pesticides, or anti-fouling paints [19,20,21], and cyanotoxins at very low concentrations may have positive effects on plant growth [22]. Cyanobacterial mats also can be used in agriculture as biofertilizers, plant stimulants, and soil amendments [23] or in control of plant pests [20]. The interest in this bioresource is increasing worldwide since cyanobacteria can be obtained from the environment in abundance or can be grown in controlled environment (in bioreactors, vessels, large outdoor tanks, or indoors). Furthermore, cyanobacterial biomass obtained at an industrial scale can be used to produce biofuels, contributing to ameliorate the world energy crisis and circular economy [24]. Exopolysaccharides (EPSs) in particular, in cyanobacteria, have been identified as excellent sources of cellulose for the production of bioethanol [25]. Cyanobacteria are also very rich in nutrients (proteins, carbohydrates, sugars, lipids, and vitamins), thus being very attractive food supplements [26,27].
Nevertheless, a major bottleneck in the exploitation of cyanobacteria is the production of cyanotoxins, including MCs and CYN, by some species or strains. The discovery of methods of processing cyanobacterial biomasses, leading to a decrease in the amount of toxic compounds, may be of high interest in the exploitation of this resource and development of new products. Therefore, the aim of this study is to explore cost-effective treatments by thermal heating, ozone, sunlight, and UV exposure, to reduce the concentration of MC-LR and CYN in M. aeruginosa and C. ovalisporum biomass.
2. Materials and Methods
2.1. Biological Material
For this study, two toxin-producing cyanobacterial strains from the Blue Biotechnology and Ecotoxicology Culture Collection (LEGE-CC) [28] were used. The cyanobacteria M. aeruginosa (LEGE 91094) and C. ovalisporum (LEGE X-001) were grown in sterilized Z8 medium at 26 ± 1 °C, with a photoperiod of 14 h/10 h (light/dark) and a light intensity of 20 µmol m−2 s−1 [29]. After growing for 45 days in 20 L vessels, the cyanobacteria were collected by centrifugation, frozen at −80 °C, and lyophilized for posterior use.
2.2. Experimental Design
Experiments were carried out with lyophilized as well as hydrated material. In the first case, approximately 10 mg of lyophilized cyanobacterial biomass was homogeneously distributed in Petri dishes sealed with film, making three equal samples for each experimental condition (n = 3). For the hydrated biomass, approximately 10 mg of freeze-dried biomass was hydrated with 500 μL of ultrapure water and homogeneously distributed in each Petri dish, using three equal samples for each condition (n = 3). In both cases, cyanobacterial biomass was exposed to the following treatments: (1) thermal heating at 50 °C in an incubator; (2) UV light at 253.7 nm, 25 W intensity, using a UVC/T-AR PCR UV cabinet (Grant Instruments, Cambridgeshire, UK); (3) sunlight at environmental conditions; and (4) ozone using an O3 Waves PAT30 ozone generator (Environmental Waves, Póvoa de Varzim, Portugal). The samples were exposed for 2 h, 5 h, and 12 h, except in the case of ozone treatment, in which the biomass samples were exposed for 2.5 and 5 min. Samples without treatment were used as a control of the study.
Sunlight exposure experiments were performed on 15 and 16 July and on 11 and 12 October 2021 at facilities of CIIMAR (GPS coordinates: 41°10′39.2″ N, 8°42′03.5″ W), Matosinhos, Portugal. Conditions on the days of sampling varied according to Table 1. The information reported was collected at the weather station Pedras Rubras (Lat. 41°13′48″, N/Lon. 8°40′48″ W) and provided by the Portuguese Institute of the Atmosphere and Sea (IPMA).
Table 1. Meteorological conditions during sunlight exposure experiments.
2.3. Extraction of Cyanotoxins
To perform the cyanotoxin extraction, the total content of each sample was transferred from the Petri dish to a 15 mL tube. Then, 6 mL of methanol 50% (v/v) was added to M. aeruginosa material for the extraction of MC-LR and 6 mL methanol 10% (v/v) to C. ovalisporum material for the extraction of CYN. The samples were then submitted to ultrasounds for 5 min, in an ice bath, and then centrifuged (4000× g, 5 min, 4 °C). The pellet was subjected to a second extraction with 2 mL of previously mentioned solvent and left in the refrigerator at 4 °C overnight. The supernatants were pooled, and total volume was measured and afterwards stored at −20 °C until analysis.
2.4. Cyanotoxins Quantification by LC-ESI-MS
The LC-MS system used to quantify the cyanotoxins was a liquid phase chromatograph alliance e2695 HPLC system (Waters, Cedex, France), coupled with a triple quadrupole spectrometry detector (Micromass® Quattro micro™ API, Waters), with electrospray (ESI) interface. The program used for data acquisition and processing was MassLynx version 4.1. The mass spectrometer was operated in positive mode, and the quantification was performed with multiple reaction monitoring (MRM). The capillary voltage was maintained at 3.5 kV; cone at 20 V; extractor at 3 V; and lens at 0.2 V. The source temperature was held at 120 °C and desolvation at 350 °C and 500 L/h. Nitrogen was used as a sheath and auxiliary gas and argon as a collision gas at a pressure of 0.5 bar. Separation of cyanotoxins was achieved on C18 hypersil gold column (100 × 4.6 mm I.D., 5 μm, Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) kept at 45 °C, with a flow rate of 0.35 mL/min, and the injected volume was 10 μL in the loop partial mode. A gradient elution was used with mobile phase A, MeOH, and B ultrapure water, both acidified with 0.1% formic acid (10% A and 90% B for 3 min and 40% A and 60% B at 4 min during 1 min, increasing to 60% A at 7 min for 2 min, increasing to 80% A for 2 min, and returning to initial conditions at 20 min and equilibrating during 10 min). Mass parameters were optimized with a standard solution and extracts of cyanobacteria that produce cyanotoxins CYN and MC-LR, all injected in the positive polarity mode, in full scan (30–1500 m/z) and MRM mode. Mass transitions, specific for each toxin, as well as cone and collision energy voltages, are presented in Table S5. The target compounds were CYN and MC-LR. The standards and samples were injected in duplicate, and in each set of 10 samples, a blank solution and two standard solutions of different concentration were introduced. Quantification was performed by external calibration curve.
All the standards were injected individually and then as a standard mixture with a concentration interval from 5 ppb to 500 ppb. Microcystin-LR (CRM-00-MC-LR, Lot 19-001, 96% purity) and CYN (CRM-03-CYN, Lot 16-001, 99% purity) standards