Journals & Books
Help
Search
My account
Sign in
Access through your institution
Purchase PDF
Article preview
Abstract
Introduction
Section snippets
References (45)
Cited by (100)
Environmental Pollution
Volume 197
, February 2015, Pages 203-213
Ozone effects on wheat grain quality – A summary
Author links open overlay panel
Malin C. Broberg a
,
Zhaozhong Feng b
,
Yue Xin b
,
Håkan Pleijel a
Show more
Add to Mendeley
Share
Cite
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envpol.2014.12.009
Get rights and content
Highlights
•
Ozone reduces starch concentration, 1000-grain weight and volume weight of wheat.
•
Ozone enhances concentration, but reduces yield of several minerals and protein.
•
Some baking properties are positively affected by ozone.
Abstract
We synthesized the effects of ozone on wheat quality based on 42 experiments performed in Asia, Europe and North America. Data were analysed using meta-analysis and by deriving response functions between observed effects and daytime ozone concentration. There was a strong negative effect on 1000-grain weight and weaker but significant negative effects on starch concentration and volume weight. For protein and several nutritionally important minerals (K, Mg, Ca, P, Zn, Mn, Cu) concentration was significantly increased, but yields were significantly decreased by ozone. For other minerals (Fe, S, Na) effects were not significant or results inconclusive. The concentration and yield of potentially toxic Cd were negatively affected by ozone. Some baking properties (Zeleny value, Hagberg falling number) were positively influenced by ozone. Effects were similar in different exposure systems and for spring and winter wheat. Ozone effects on quality should be considered in future assessments of food security/safety.
Introduction
Ground-level ozone (O3) is an important regional to semi-global air pollutant and as well an anthropogenic greenhouse gas (Simpson et al., 2014). Tropospheric O3 is generated through photochemical reactions of so-called O3 precursors, i.e. nitrogen oxides (NOx), volatile organic compounds (VOC) including methane (CH4), and carbon monoxide (CO), which are all emitted from anthropogenic sources. Background O3 concentrations have risen from approximately 10 ppb before the industrial revolution (Volz and Kley, 1988) to daytime summer concentrations exceeding 40 ppb in many parts of the Northern Hemisphere (Vingarzan, 2004).
It is well established that current ozone concentrations are sufficiently high over large areas of the globe to cause significant adverse effects on crop production (Avnery et al., 2011, Van Dingenen et al., 2009). Wheat has been found to be a highly ozone sensitive crop (Feng and Kobayashi, 2009, Pleijel, 2011, Tai et al., 2014). There has been a strong focus on the effects of O3 on quantitative yield in crops (e.g. Feng and Kobayashi, 2009, Mills et al., 2007, Tai et al., 2014) as well as effects on photosynthesis and other physiological aspects/processes such as senescence (e.g. Feng et al., 2008, Mulholland et al., 1997, Sandelius et al., 1995) which are important for the mechanistic understanding of growth effects and for modelling. Although some studies have included quality aspects (e.g. Fuhrer et al., 1990, Pleijel, 2012, Vandermeiren et al., 1992, Zheng et al., 2013), less attention has been paid to these when it comes to research syntheses and policy related work. This paper summarises what is known about the effects of O3 on wheat grain quality traits. The study is based on existing literature, but also includes some until now unpublished quality data for experiments already described in the literature, and covers experiments performed in Europe, North America and Asia.
Several quality traits exist for a crop like wheat. Some of these (primarily grain protein concentration, 1000-grain weight, volume weight, baking quality) may affect the market price of the yield. Others are nutritionally or otherwise important, but external to the market. These include e.g. the concentration of different nutrient mineral constituents and the content of the potentially toxic element Cd.
Certain aspects of wheat quality are linked to physical characteristics such as the average 1000-grain weight (technically: the mass of 1000 grains) and volume weight (technically: the density or specific mass of grain). Low values of these variables indicate a large occurrence of small and malformed grains reducing the quality for use of the grain, while higher values generally are related to larger flour yield (Manley et al., 2009, Weiss and Moreno-Sotomayer, 2006). Another group of quality properties is the concentration of various nutrients including protein, macronutrients such as Mg, K, Ca, P and S as well as micronutrients like Zn, Fe, Mn and Cu. Cd is also of interest since bread is an important pathway for human intake of this potentially highly toxic, bioaccumulating element, which may have a number of important adverse health effects, for example on kidney and bone (Satarug et al., 2010). While the concentration of various grain mineral constituents is important from a qualitative perspective, also the unit area yields of these constituents are relevant for human nutrition and for biogeochemical considerations of the balance of input/output in the agro-ecosystems. In case the unit area yield of protein or minerals is reduced, this may significantly and negatively affect the ability of people to access sufficient protein and minerals in areas of food scarcity in addition to the loss of food energy caused by the O3 impairment of grain yield. Therefore we assess both O3 effects on concentrations and on the yield of these constituents.
Starch is the main source of energy in wheat grain, consisting often in the range of 60–70% of grain mass, and wheat is the second most important energy source for the human population. Thus, starch concentration was relevant to include in the study.
Finally, since wheat is used to a large extent for baking, some quality traits are related to baking quality. Here the Zeleny value, the Hagberg falling number and gluten are frequently used indicators. The Zeleny value is determined by a sedimentation test that measures the rate of sedimentation of wheat flour suspended in an acid solution. Sedimentation occurs due to swelling of glutenin, which is a major protein in wheat flour. A high Zeleny value (sedimentation volume) is associated with a high protein content and good baking quality (Eckert et al., 1993, Reeves et al., 1978). Hagberg falling number is a measure of α-amylase activity in wheat grains and its resistance to enzymatic degradation. Low falling numbers represent high α-amylase activity and thus more germinated grains, resulting in poor baking qualities, such as sticky dough and poorly structured loaves (Kindred et al., 2005). Additionally, a higher falling number enables longer storage time for flour and grains (Hruskova et al., 2004).
The aim of this study is to provide a comprehensive overview of all known effects of O3 on wheat grain quality based on all available ecologically realistic experiments, using open-top chambers (OTC) or free air concentration enrichment with ozone (FACE) and presented as meta-analysis (to check the statistical significance of the effects) and as response regressions (to assess the magnitude of effect in relation to exposure).
Section snippets
Database
Relevant papers were searched using Web of Science and selected to be included if the following criteria were fulfilled:
1.
Daytime ozone concentration, [O3]day, was reported (7-h, 8-h, 12-h, 6-h or 4-h).
2.
At least one of the following yield quality responses was reported: 1000-grain weight, volume weight, grain protein concentration, mineral nutrient concentration (P, K, Ca, Zn, Fe, Mn, Mg, Cu, S, Na), Cd concentration, or baking quality properties (Hagberg falling number, Zeleny value, wet and dry
Grain yield, 1000-grain weight and volume weight
In Fig. 1, Fig. 2, the effects of O3 on grain yield (GY), 1000-grain weight and volume weight are presented using the CF treatment and the NF treatment as the reference, respectively. Except for volume weight using CF as the reference (Fig. 1) all variables were significantly negatively affected by O3. For GY and 1000-grain weight there were strongly significant negative effects, which differed relatively little between spring and winter wheat. The comparison of effects in OTC experiments and
Discussion
The qualitative review by Wang and Frei (2011) clearly showed that O3 has a strong potential to affect a wide range of quality traits in crops and that both negative and positive effects are likely to occur. Indeed, the comprehensive quantitative assessment of the present study shows that O3 has a wide range of significant effects on wheat quality and that some of the effects can be regarded as negative, while other are positive. Among the unequivocally adverse effects are the strong negative
Conclusions
The main conclusions for this study were:
•
Ozone significantly reduces 1000-grain weight (strongly), volume weight and starch concentration of wheat.
•
Ozone enhances the concentrations but strongly reduces the yield of important wheat grain constituents such as protein, phosphorus, magnesium, potassium, calcium, zinc and manganese.
•
Ozone negatively affected the concentration and yield of the potentially toxic element cadmium.
•
Ozone positively affects the baking properties of wheat, as a result of
Acknowledgements
The authors wish to thank the Strategic Research Area BECC (Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services in a Changing Climate, http://www.cec.lu.se/o.o.i.s/24960), the EU FP7 programme ECLAIRE (Project No. 282910) and the Hundred Talents Program, Chinese Academy of Sciences.
References
1
(45)
S. Avnery et al.
Global crop yield reductions due to surface ozone exposure: 1. Year 2000 crop production losses and economic damage
Atmos. Environ.
(2011)
D.R. Cooley et al.
The impact of ozone on assimilate partitioning in plants: a review
Environ. Pollut.
(1987)
Z.Z. Feng et al.
Assessing the impacts of current and future concentrations of surface ozone on crop yield with meta-analysis
Atmos. Environ.
(2009)
J. Fuhrer et al.
Effects of ozone on the grain composition of spring wheat grown in open-top field chambers
Environ. Pollut.
(1990)
J. Fuhrer et al.
Critical levels for ozone effects on vegetation in Europe
Environ. Pollut.
(1997)
M. Manley et al.
Assessment of variance in the measurement of hectolitre mass of wheat, using equipment from different grain producing and exporting countries
Biosyst. Eng.
(2009)
G. Mills et al.
A synthesis of AOT40-based response functions and critical levels of ozone for agricultural and horticultural crops
Atmos. Environ.
(2007)
H. Pleijel
Reduced ozone by air filtration consistently improved grain yield in wheat
Environ. Pollut.
(2011)
H. Pleijel et al.
Differential ozone sensitivity in an old and a modern Swedish wheat cultivar–grain yield and quality, leaf chlorophyll and stomatal conductance
Environ. Exp. Bot.
(2006)
A. Sarkar et al.
Elevated ozone and two modern wheat cultivars: an assessment of dose dependent sensitivity with respect to growth, reproductive and yield parameters
Environ. Exp. Bot.
(2010)
View more references
Cited by (100)
Can ethylenediurea (EDU) alter the effects of ozone on the source-sink regulation of nitrogen uptake and remobilization during grain filling period in rice?
2024, Science of the Total Environment
Show abstract
Quantifying variabilities in monoterpene emission among natural individuals of an urban-greening species (Quercus phylliraeoides) using a rapid measuring method
2024, Urban Forestry and Urban Greening
Show abstract
Effects of elevated ozone on physiology, growth, yield and grain quality of rice (Oryza sativa L.): An ozone gradient experiment
2024, Agriculture, Ecosystems and Environment
Show abstract
Alteration of carbon and nitrogen allocation in winter wheat under elevated ozone
2024, Plant Science
Show abstract
Effect of ozone stress on crop productivity: A threat to food security
2023, Environmental Research
Show abstract
Effects of ozone, drought and heat stress on wheat yield and grain quality
2023, Agriculture, Ecosystems and Environment
Show abstract
View all citing articles on Scopus
1
References used for the general text.
View full text
Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
Recommended articles
Ozone exposure and flux-based response functions for photosynthetic traits in wheat, maize and poplar
Environmental Pollution, Volume 206, 2015, pp. 411-420
Matthieu Bagard, …, Didier Le Thiec
The interactive effects of elevated ozone and wheat cultivars on soil microbial community composition and metabolic diversity
Applied Soil Ecology, Volume 87, 2015, pp. 11-18
Xuelian Bao, …, Qi Li
Genotypic differences in utilization of nutrients in wheat under ambient ozone concentrations: Growth, biomass and yield
Agriculture, Ecosystems & Environment, Volume 199, 2015, pp. 26-33
Poonam Singh, …, Aradhana Singh
Show 3 more articles
Article Metrics
Citations
Citation Indexes:
95
Captures
Readers:
112
View details
About ScienceDirect
Remote access
Shopping cart
Advertise
Contact and support
Terms and conditions
Privacy policy
Cookies are used by this site.
Cookie Settings
All content on this site: Copyright © 2024 Elsevier B.V., its licensors, and contributors. All rights are reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. For all open access content, the Creative Commons licensing terms apply.
We use cookies that are necessary to make our site work. We may also use additional cookies to analyze, improve, and personalize our content and your digital experience. For more information, see ourCookie Policy
Cookie Settings
Accept all cookies