Loading [MathJax]/jax/output/HTML-CSS/config.js
Your privacy, your choice
We use essential cookies to make sure the site can function. We, and our 209 partners, also use optional cookies and similar technologies for advertising, personalisation of content, usage analysis, and social media.
By accepting optional cookies, you consent to allowing us and our partners to store and access personal data on your device, such as browsing behaviour and unique identifiers. Some third parties are outside of the European Economic Area, with varying standards of data protection. See our privacy policy for more information on the use of your personal data. Your consent choices apply to springer.com and applicable subdomains.
You can find further information, and change your preferences via 'Manage preferences'.
You can also change your preferences or withdraw consent at any time via 'Your privacy choices', found in the footer of every page.
We use cookies and similar technologies for the following purposes:
Store and/or access information on a device
Personalised advertising and content, advertising and content measurement, audience research and services development
Accept all cookies
Reject optional cookies
Manage preferences
Skip to main content
Log in
Find a journal
Publish with us
Track your research
Search
Cart
Home International Journal of Fracture Article
The tearing energy threshold of crack growth in rubber exposed to ozone: an experimental–numerical approach
Research
Open access
Published: 13 June 2024
(2024)
Cite this article
Download PDF
You have full access to this
open access
article
International Journal of Fracture
Aims and scope
Submit manuscript
Ondřej Peter, Martin Stěnička, Gert Heinrich, Christopher G. Robertson, Jakub Pawlas, Radek Stoček & Jan Ondrík 
346 Accesses
Explore all metrics
Abstract
The global rubber industry is seeking alternatives to the widely-used antiozonant, N-(1,3-dimethylbutyl)-N′-phenyl-p-phenylenediamine (6PPD), due to its environmental toxicity concerns when used in automobile tires. These substantial research and development efforts on new antiozonants for rubber are hindered by a general inability to characterize the fundamental physical parameter of ozone-induced tearing energy threshold for crack growth, which underlies the practical ozone resistance of rubber products. Therefore, this paper presents, for the first time, a novel experimental–numerical combined approach to determine the tearing energy threshold in rubber exposed to ozone, which is a key criterion for assessing the resistance of rubber to ozone crack growth. The approach is based on in-situ optical analysis of ozone crack growth on the rubber surface and the determination of the crack growth rate when the rubber is stretched. Subsequently, the growth rates form the basis for calculating the energy release rates at the crack tips using the finite element method in Ansys software. By comparing the calculated energy release rates and experimentally measured crack growth rates, the energy release rate interval corresponding to the threshold tearing energy is determined. Based on this approach, the tearing energy threshold for carbon black reinforced natural rubber exposed to ozone was found to be a maximum of 2.12 J/m2. This value is 96% lower than the threshold for the non-ozone-exposed specimens. In conclusion, this novel methodology was able to determine the ozone threshold tearing energy and represents a powerful, unique tool for an efficient future development of environmentally friendly antiozonants.
Similar content being viewed by others
Investigation of Ozone Cracking on Natural Rubber
Article 01 June 2018
An experimental investigation on the degradation effect of ozone on hyperelastic behavior of an NR/BR blend
Article 14 October 2015
Temperature-Dependent Tearing Behavior of Rubber Materials: Characterization and Modeling
Article 07 February 2024
1 Introduction
One of the most common and aggressive chemical processes causing rubber degradation is the reaction of atmospheric ozone in polydiene rubbers with unsaturated main chains, resulting in chain scission and a reduction in the surface strength of the rubber. This degradation process is commonly prevented by the use of chemical raw materials known as antiozonants. However, the recent studies have highlighted the toxicity and its negative effects on organisms associated with the antiozonant N-(1,3-dimethylbutyl)-N′-phenyl-p-phenylenediamine (6PPD), an essential component of rubber compounds used in tires and other rubber products containing unsaturated elastomers (Brinkmann et al. 2022; Foldvik et al. 2022; Tian et al. 2022; Chen et al. 2023; Lo et al. 2023). The reaction of 6PPD with ozone forms 6PPD-quinone, which enters the environment through tire wear particles (Kole et al. 2017; Sommer et al. 2018; Wagner et al. 2018; Klockner et al. 2021; Giere and Dietze 2022) and can contaminate streams near road run-offs, where it is particularly toxic to coho salmon, as uncovered in the seminal work in this area (Tian et al. 2022). Therefore, the development of suitable, more organism-friendly antiozonants is currently an extremely important challenge for rubber scientists.
Ozone is a relatively unstable molecule made up of three oxygen atoms. Although it is present in very small quantities in the atmosphere, it is of great importance to living organisms. Depending in which parts of the atmosphere it is found, it can play a positive or negative role (Fabian and Dameris 2014). Ozone in the stratosphere acts as a “UV filter”—a shield that prevents harmful short-wave UV radiation from reaching the Earth’s surface. In addition, ozone is found in the lower part of the atmosphere—the troposphere (Monks et al. 2014)—where it is more relevant to our daily lives. This is where it gets in as a product of burning fossil fuels, mainly from car traffic (Shindell et al. 2012). In the troposphere, ozone is considered a pollutant, because, as a strong oxidizing agent, it attacks the respiratory tract, has harmful effects on flora and fauna (Shindell et al. 2012) and damages materials such as natural rubber (Lake 1970). Therefore, its exposure is identified as a significant factor impacting the longevity of rubber components.
The exposure of unsaturated rubber compounds to ozone induces oxidative cleavage on the rubber’s surface, a phenomenon extensively studied (Harries 1905; Criegee 1975; Coran 2002). This oxidative cleavage results in the breakage of molecules, leading to the formation of what is commonly referred to as ozone cracks. To prevent this phenomenon, antiozonants are added to the formulation during the production of rubber compounds (Braden and Gent 1962). A combination of para-phenylenediamines (PPDs) (Cataldo 2019) and wax (Dimauro et al. 1979) is most commonly used to prevent ozone cracking. PPDs are classified as chemical protection, as they chemically react directly with the degradant. On the other hand, wax serves as physical protection, migrating to the surface of rubber compound, thus forming a physical barrier between the polymer and the external environment.
Numerous research papers (Braden and Gent 1960a, 1962; b; Kamaruddin and Muhr 2018; Lake and Lindley 1965; Lake 1970, 1992; Ruggs 1952; Serrano et al. 1993; Treib et al. 2022; Zheng et al. 2021) have reported the effects of ozone on crack initiation, as well as on the mechanical and chemical properties of rubber materials. Specifically, the aging behaviour of natural rubber (NR) under ozone exposure was examined by Zheng et al. (2021), where it was concluded that the duration of ozone aging plays a crucial role in the process, resulting in significant changes in the mechanical properties of NR. It was also determined that ozone aging progresses from the material’s surface towards its interior. Additionally, Treib et al. (2022) conducted an investigation about the ozone aging of NR mixtures containing 6PPD and paraffin wax as antiozonants, using various experimental techniques. They concluded, that NR is always somewhat sensitive to ozone even when 6PPD and paraffin wax are present in the mixture. Finally, Bensalem et al. (2024) conducted a comprehensive review summarizing the current understanding of elastomer degradation, encompassing various mechanisms, notably the ozone degradation mechanism.
To assess the resistance of rubber materials to ozone cracking, the ISO 1431-1 standard (ISO 2022) is currently the most widely utilized. However, this standard evaluates the ozone resistance of rubber under specific static or dynamic loading and at a given ozone concentration, only visually. Then, based on a visual inspection of the specimen, it is possible to qualitatively assess whether cracks are present in the specimen, determine the time to crack initiation as well as the strain threshold for crack initiation. The result is then simply a qualitative assessment of the rubber’s resistance to ozone-induced crack initiation. For a quantitative description of the effect of antiozonants or the composition of the rubber itself on the already ozone-induced cracks, this standard is inadequate.
The behaviour of already ozone-induced cracks has been studied in the work (Lake and Lindley 1965), where the authors concluded that the tearing energy threshold value of crack growth rate under ozone exposure, denoted as Tz, is significantly different and orders of magnitude lower compared to the threshold value under mechanical loading, denoted as T0. Consequently, the crack grows under ozone exposure even below the T0. Furthermore, the authors found that the crack growth rate under ozone exposure is similar under both dynamic and static loading conditions. In a later study (Lake 1970), the author stated that with increasing ozone concentration, the rate of growth is also increasing. Furthermore, the use of antiozonants increases the Tz and simultaneously retards the crack growth rate in the region above this threshold. All these effects are illustrated in the scheme in Fig. 1.
Fig. 1
Generalized crack growth rate curve for rubber under ozone exposure. Shown are the tear strength (critical tearing energy, Tc), the mechanical tearing energy threshold (T0), and the ozone-induced tearing energy threshold (Tz), the latter shown with and without an effective antiozonant in the rubber formulation
Full size image
This work is a continuation of the aforementioned studies, focusing primarily on describing a novel methodology for determining the tearing energy threshold value of crack growth under ozone exposure, Tz. The aim is to establish a methodology capable of reproducibly quantifying the influence of different antiozonants on the value of Tz in the future. This paper deals only with detailing the methodology itself, with the research on the influence of various antiozonants to be reported in the follow-up scientific work.
2 Theoretical background
The proposed methodology relies on an experimental–numerical approach and is based on the theoretical interaction between initiated cracks. Stress concentration occurs at the crack tip, while stress relief takes place near the crack faces. If a smaller crack is near a larger crack, the stress at the tip of the smaller crack is significantly influenced by the stress relief of a larger crack face. This leads to a considerably lower energy release rate for the affected crack. For a clearer understanding, one can consider the following examples, assuming an infinitely long specimen loaded with uniaxial tension.
In the first case (see Fig. 2a), we assume that only one crack is initiated in the specimen. The stress concentration occurs at the crack tip, while stress relief takes place along the crack faces. It can be presumed that if the energy release rate is higher than the threshold value for crack growth rate, the crack will grow, and vice versa.
Fig. 2
Schematic explanation of crack interaction. The red shaded regions represent stress concentration, and the blue shaded regions represent stress relief
Full size image
In the second case (see Fig. 2b), we consider the initiation of two cracks, each with a different size and sufficiently far apart. Again, it can be presumed that if the energy release rate for each individual crack is higher than the threshold value for crack growth rate, the cracks will grow, and vice versa. There is no mutual influence between the cracks in this scenario.
In the third case (see Fig. 2c), we explore the initiation of two cracks, each with a different size, but initiated in close proximity. For a larger crack, it can be expected to behave independently of a shorter crack, and if the energy release rate for larger crack exceeds the threshold value, a larger crack will grow, and vice versa. However, the shorter crack is influenced by the stress relief occurring near the larger crack face, resulting in a reduction of stress concentration at the shorter crack tip and thus in a reduction in the energy release rate. Due to this stress relief, the energy release rate may fall below the threshold value, causing the crack to cease growth.
When observing crack growth on a specimen during an experiment, where cracks are initiated in close proximity, according to this hypothesis, the gradual arrest of shorter cracks can be expected. By determining the sizes of individual cracks and their relative positions at different times, utilizing