  cerca
Register
Login
HOME
JOURNALS  
HOW TO USE AJOL  
RESOURCES  
SUPPORTERS  
                Tropical Journal of Pharmaceutical Research
Journal / Tropical Journal of Pharmaceutical Research / Vol. 15 No. 10 (2016) / Articles
  Current
Archives
About
Article Sidebar
DOWNLOAD PDF
  Published:
Nov 14, 2016
DOI:
10.4314/tjpr.v15i10.13
Keywords:
Ozone treatment Gluten proteins Chemical changes Rheological studies CD spectroscopy Thermal properties
Article Details
Issue
Vol. 15 No. 10 (2016)
Section
Articles
Submission of a manuscript to this journal is a representation that the manuscript has not been published previously and is not under consideration for publication elsewhere.
All authors named in each manuscript would be required to sign a form (to be supplied by the Editor) so that they may retain their copyright in the article but to assign to us (the Publishers) and its licensees in perpetuity, in all forms, formats and media (whether known or created in the future) to (i) publish, reproduce, distribute, display and store the contribution, (ii) translate the contribution into other languages, create adaptations, reprints, include within collections and create summaries, extracts and/or abstracts of the contribution, (iii) create any other derivative works(s) based on the contribution, (iv) to exploit all subsidiary rights in the contribution, (v) the inclusion of electronic links from the contribution to third party material where-ever it may be located, and (vi) license any thrid party to do any or all of the above.
Main Article Content
Effect of ozone gas processing on physical and chemical properties of wheat proteins

Mohammed Obadi
Ke-Xue Zhu
Wei Peng
Al-Farga Ammar
Hui-Ming Zhou
Abstract
Purpose: To investigate the effects of ozone treatment on chemical and physical properties of wheat (Triticum aestivum L.) gluten, glutenin and gliadin.
Methods: Wheat proteins isolated from wheat flour were treated with ozone gas. The physical and chemical properties of gluten proteins were investigated after treatment with ozone gas, with 5 g/h produced as a function of time (0, 30, and 60 min) in the study. To check whether the process of ozonation promoted changes in the quality of gluten proteins, sulfhydryl groups (SH), differential scanning calorimetry (DSC), secondary structure, SDS-PAGE, and rheology analyses were performed.
Results: Sulfhydryl group contents of wheat proteins ranged from 1.1 to 7.12 μmol/g. Sulfhydryl group content for all ozonated proteins was significantly lower than that of the control samples. Gluten proteins showed reduced SDS-PAGE band intensities of both high (HMW) gluten and glutenin subunits with increasing ozone gas treatment. The denaturation temperatures (Td) of ozonated gluten proteins were higher (99.80–106.79 °C) and the enthalpies of the ozonated gluten proteins were lower than those of the control samples. The storage moduli (G') and loss moduli (G”) of gluten and glutenin tended to increase from 7.84 to 10.20 KPa and 43.19 to 48.28 KPa, and from 3.33 to 4.06 KPa and 20.74 to 22.56 KPa, respectively, as ozone exposure increased from 0 to 30 min.
Conclusion: Ozone gas can oxidize wheat proteins. Exposing wheat proteins to ozone gas for an extended time (60 min) deteriorated wheat protein quality.
Keywords: Ozone treatment, Gluten proteins, Chemical changes, Rheological studies, CD spectroscopy, Thermal properties
Journal Identifiers

eISSN: 1596-9827
print ISSN: 1596-5996
  About AJOL
AJOL Team
AJOL Board
Donors
Partners
Sponsors
Contact
Usage Statistics
Journal Quality
About AJOL
Policies
Whistle blowing
Terms and conditions
Non-profit Organisation
 
AJOL is a non-profit, relying on your support.
DONATE

AJOL's largest donor partners:
Click here to sign up for titles of interest.
Follow AJOL