Home
Browse
Journal Info
Guide for Authors
Submit Manuscript
Contact Us
  Login
Register
Home Articles List Article Information
|
|
|
How to cite
|
Share
Articles in Press
Current Issue
Journal Archive
Volume 5 (2024)
Issue 1
Volume 4 (2023)
Volume 3 (2022)
Volume 2 (2021)
Volume 1 (2020)
Using UV/Ozone Accelerated Aging Technique to Prepare Artificial Deteriorated Standard Dyed Woolen Samples for Textile Conservation Purposes
Article 4, Volume 5, Issue 1, June 2024, Page 64-76  
PDF (1.16 MB)
Document Type: Original Article
DOI: 10.21608/ARCS.2024.281624.1048
View on SCiNiTO
Authors
Amera Mazen 1; ahmed Abdel-Razik 2; Mohamed Marouf3; Omar Abdel-kareem4
1Conservation Dept. Archaeological Textiles Conservation, Faculty of Arts, Sohag University, sohag, Egypt
2Materials Testing and Surface Chemical Analysis Lab., National Institute for Standards, Giza, Egypt
31Conservation Dept. Archaeological Textiles Conservation, Faculty of Arts, Sohag University, sohag, Egypt
4Conservation Department, Faculty of Archaeology, Cairo University, , Giza, Egypt
Abstract
Before the introduction of synthetic dyes in 1856, natural dyes from plants and insects were commonly used to color fabrics. However, these dyes are prone to fading and damage, posing challenges for conservators when cleaning, preserving, or displaying historical textiles. To address this issue, creating mimic samples that accurately replicate the conditions of these valuable artifacts provides a valuable opportunity for conservation research and testing of materials. This study aims to explore the feasibility of using the UV/Ozone technique  to create  artificial samples of faded dyed woolen fabric that resembles ancient textiles, without damaging the original artifacts. These samples could be used as models in conservation laboratories. Three natural dyes (Turmeric, madder, and cochineal) were used to dye new wool fabrics, with different mordants (alum, potassium dichromate, and copper sulfate) to achieve various hues. The dyed wool samples were then artificially aged using UV/Ozone for different durations. The color of the samples gradually faded as they aged, with changes in the CIE L*a*b* parameters and overall color difference (ΔE*) analyzed. The morphology and mechanical properties, including tensile strength and elongation, were also studied. Yellow dyes were found to be the most light-sensitive, while red dyes aged faster. The results suggest that artificial aged wool textile samples can be quickly created for experimental purposes, providing valuable insights for conservation research.

Highlights
This research offers a new eco-friendly and fast accelerated aging technique.
UV/Ozone showed high performance aging effect on wool fabric samples.
Simulated samples to historical textiles are achieved throughout this work
Morphological, mechanical, and color parameters proved the efficiency of the ageing process. 
Three natural dyes mordanted with three mordants were chosen to achieve different chroma and hues.
Keywords
Wool; natural dyes; UV/ozone; accelerated aging; SEM; color measurement; FTIR
Statistics
Article View: 39
PDF Download: 50
Home | Glossary | News | Aims and Scope | Sitemap
Top

Journal Management System. Designed by NotionWave.