We process personal data collected when visiting the website. The function of obtaining information about users and their behavior is carried out by voluntarily entered information in forms and saving cookies in end devices. Data, including cookies, are used to provide services, improve the user experience and to analyze the traffic in accordance with the Privacy policy. Data are also collected and processed by Google Analytics tool (more).

You can change cookies settings in your browser. Restricted use of cookies in the browser configuration may affect some functionalities of the website.
I agree
I do not agree
PL
EN
Current issue
Articles in press
About the Journal
Editorial Board
Ethic & Malpractice
Editorial Office and Publisher
Volume 25, Issue 9, 2024
Stats
CC-BY 4.0
Get citation
Application of Life Cycle Assessment on Processing of Beef Rendang Products Using Steam Cauldron Technology
Muhammad Fachri Ridwan 1
,
  Rizki Aziz 1
,
  Rinda Andhita Regia 1
      More details

  Ecol. Eng. Environ. Technol. 2024; 9:298-311
  KEYWORDS
LCA
environmental impacts
CML-IA Baseline
gate-to-gate
rendang
  TOPICS
Sustainable development
Environmental life-cycle assessment (LCA)
  ABSTRACT
The beef rendang production process at the Payakumbuh Rendang Small and Medium Industry (SMI) Center can cause environmental impacts due to the use of energy which produces various emissions, such as the use of boilers. This research aims to analyze the life cycle of the rendang production process in the form of inventory data including raw materials, energy, and emissions produced in the production process, and analyze the environmental impact of 250 g packaged rendang which includes the transportation, storage, washing, cutting, milling, grating, pressing processes, cooking and packaging using the Life Cycle Assessment (LCA) method, and providing recommendations for improvements at stages of the production process. This research uses a gate-to-gate approach on SimaPro 9.5 software with the CML-IA Baseline method and refers to the 2016 ISO 14040 standard. The results of this research show the impact of 250 g of packaged rendang, for the global warming potential (GWP100a) category of 1.41E -13 kg CO₂ eq, ozone layer depletion 1.45E-16 kg CFC-11 eq, human toxicity 1.06E-14 kg 1.4-DB eq, photochemical oxidation 1.12E-14 kg C₂H₄ eq, acidification 1.07E-13 kg SO₂ eq, and eutrophication 4.98E-14 kg PO₄ eq. The use of electrical energy during the storage, packaging, and cooking processes has an impact on the environment. Recommendations for improvements given to reduce environmental impacts are that the use of Beef freezers for storing spices can reduce electricity usage in the storage process by 17.9%, optimizing the retort usage time from 1.5 hours to 10 minutes reduces electricity usage packaging process by 24%, and the addition of hybrid solar panels for boilers can reduce electricity usage from Coal-Fired Power Plant (PLTU) by 63%. The improvement scenario shows a reduction in electricity use during the production process by 79.1% and results in a reduction of 9-68.4% for all impact categories.
Submit your paper
Instructions for Authors
All issues
Share
Send by email
RELATED ARTICLE
Environmental Impact Analysis in 3x10 MW Coal Fired Power Plant Through Life Cycle Assessment
Environmental Impacts of the Solar Photovoltaic Systems in the Context of Globalization
References of the Concept of Retardation of Natural Resources Transformation into Selected Legislative Acts in the Context of Building Sustainable Development and Circular Economy
PRINCIPLES OF ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT IN THE LIFECYCLE OF PRODUCTS
REQUIREMENTS ECO-DESIGN VACUUMS BY COMMISSION REGULATION (EU) NO 666/2013