T&F eBooks
‍
Advanced Search
Login
About Us
Subjects
Browse
Products
Request a trial
Librarian Resources
What's New!!
HomeFood Science & TechnologyFood EngineeringFood PackagingPrinciples of Modified-Atmosphere and Sous Vide Product PackagingModified Atmosphere Packaging of Bakery and Pasta Products
Chapter
Modified Atmosphere Packaging of Bakery and Pasta Products
ByJ. P. Smtth, B. K. Simpson
Book
Principles of Modified-Atmosphere and Sous Vide Product Packaging
Edition 1st Edition
First Published 1995
Imprint Routledge
Pages 36
eBook ISBN 9780203742075
Share
ABSTRACT
Bakery and pasta products are an important part of a balanced diet and account for 20% of the daily dietary protein of the average Canadian consumer. In 1987, the Canadian bakery industry sold $1.33 billion worth of products, or approximately 4% of total food sales, with bread accounting for approximately 50% of the total value of bakery products sold. Moisture loss or pick-up is a serious problem in many bakery products irrespective of moisture level. Both moisture loss and moisture pick-up can be prevented by packaging products with proper sealing in moisture impermeable packaging material such as low density polyethylene. The most important microbial problem limiting the shelf life of high and intermediate bakery products is mold growth. Bacterial spoilage is the major problem limiting the shelf life of fresh and pre-cooked pasta products.
Previous Chapter
Next Chapter
You do not have access to this content currently. Please click 'Get Access' button to see if you or your institution have access to this content.
GET ACCESS

To purchase a print version of this book for personal use or request an inspection copy 
GO TO ROUTLEDGE.COM

Policies
Privacy Policy
Terms & Conditions
Cookie Policy
Journals
Taylor & Francis Online
Corporate
Taylor & Francis Group
Help & Contact
Students/Researchers
Librarians/Institutions
Connect with us
Registered in England & Wales No. 3099067
5 Howick Place | London | SW1P 1WG
© 2024 Informa UK Limited