МОЛОДЕЖНЫЙ ИННОВАЦИОННЫЙ ВЕСТНИК
ISSN 2415-7805 (Print)
HOME
ABOUT THE JOURNAL
ISSUES
CONTACT
SUBSCRIPTIONS
ALL JOURNALS
User
Username
Password
Remember me
Forgot password? Register
Notifications
View
Subscribe
Search
Search
Search Scope
All
Authors
Title
Abstract
Index terms
Full Text
Browse
By Issue
By Author
By Title
Other Journals
Announcements
More Announcements...

Home > Archives > Vol 13, No 2 (2024) > The impact of atmospheric air pollution on the health of the population of the Voronezh Region
The impact of atmospheric air pollution on the health of the population of the Voronezh Region
Authors: Petrikhina O.N.1, Enin A.V.1, Mekhantyeva L.E.1
Affiliations:
Voronezh State Medical University named after N. N. Burdenko
Issue: Vol 13, No 2 (2024): Материалы XVII Международной научно-практической конференции молодых ученых-медиков СОВА-2024
Pages: 95-97
Section: СОВА - 2024
URL: https://new.vestnik-surgery.com/index.php/2415-7805/article/view/9913

Cite item
Full Text
(RUSSIAN)
(JATS XML)
Abstract
Full Text
About the authors
References
Supplementary files
Statistics
Abstract
Introduction. The high level of urbanization in the Voronezh region is characterized by developed industrial production, numerous motor vehicles, which invariably leads to artificial pollution of the atmosphere. These substances have a complex effect on the body of residents and lead to the development of various diseases or exacerbation of chronic nosologies. Monitoring and recording of pollutant concentrations is necessary to develop measures to ensure hygienic safety.
Materials and methods: in the course of the study, a mathematical and statistical analysis of data from scientific articles and publications, as well as the results of monitoring atmospheric air pollution in the Voronezh Region for 2020-2022, was carried out.
Results: The main factors of atmospheric pollution are the components of emissions from stationary and mobile sources. At thirteen posts in the Voronezh city district and in several districts of the region, the average daily concentration of the following substances is estimated: carbon monoxide, sulfur dioxide, nitrogen dioxide, suspended solids, ozone, phenol. The concentration of four carcinogenic substances is also taken into account: lead, styrene, formaldehyde and soot.
Conclusion: the high level of urbanization, and the associated growth of industrial production, motor transport, leads to the development of diseases of the respiratory and nervous systems in residents of the Voronezh region. In children under 14 years of age, the development of bronchial asthma is most common, in adults — chronic bronchitis and emphysema of the lungs.
Keywords
atmospheric air, atmospheric pollution, development of chronic diseases, complex effect on the body, MPC of pollutants














This website uses cookies
You consent to our cookies if you continue to use our website.

About Cookies