Browse
Search
Publish
Login  |  Register
Home All Journals Chemical Engineering Communications List of Issues Latest Articles Magnetite nanoparticle mediated ozonatio ....
Search in:
This Journal
Anywhere
Advanced search
Chemical Engineering Communications
Latest Articles
Submit an article Journal homepage
28
Views
0
CrossRef citations to date
Altmetric
Research Article
Magnetite nanoparticle mediated ozonation of ciprofloxacin wastewater: energy calculation and optimization of parameters
Arunima Singh
, Sameer Dalvi
, Manish Kumar Sinha
& Snigdha Khuntia
Published online: 08 Jun 2024
Cite this article https://doi.org/10.1080/00986445.2024.2362815
  Full Article Figures & data References Citations Metrics Reprints & Permissions Read this article
Abstract
This study focuses on synthesizing a catalyst that can quickly degrade micropollutants in water with minimal ozone exposure. While ozone is an effective oxidizing agent, it can harm the environment at higher concentrations if released in gaseous form. Thus, due to their efficiency and non-toxicity, researchers prefer to use hydroxyl radicals as oxidizing agents. In this study, Fe magnetite nanoparticles (FeNPs) have been synthesized to generate hydroxyl radicals for ozonation. The stability and effectiveness of the FeNPs as an ozonation catalyst were tested under different pH levels and ozone doses. Promising results have been obtained showing complete degradation of the model pharmaceutical compound within 10 min for the catalytic ozonation process. The parameters have been optimized for the holistic picture of the process, and their significance on the % degradation has been evaluated thoroughly. The energy requirement of the process has been evaluated to compare the proposed work with the available AOPs. It was found that the heterogenous catalytic ozonation process projects a much lower energy requirement as compared to many other AOPs.
Keywords: Energy consumptionhydroxyl radicalsiron nanoparticlesoptimizationpharmaceutical productwater pollution
Acknowledgments
The authors thank the Department of Science and Technology, India (DST) for the complete financial support under grant number EWO/WTI/2K19/EWFH/2019/102, Water Technology Initiative. We are also grateful to the central instrumentation facility of Ahmedabad University for the research and for performing the experimental and analytical work.
Disclosure statement
There are no conflicts to declare.
Additional information
Funding
This study was supported by Department of Science and Technology, Ministry of Science and Technology, India.
Related research

People also read
Recommended articles
Cited by
Information for
Authors
R&D professionals
Editors
Librarians
Societies
Open access
Overview
Open journals
Open Select
Dove Medical Press
F1000Research
Opportunities
Reprints and e-prints
Advertising solutions
Accelerated publication
Corporate access solutions
Help and information
Help and contact
Newsroom
All journals
Books
Keep up to date
Register to receive personalised research and resources by email
Sign me up
Copyright © 2024Informa UK Limited Privacy policy Cookies Terms & conditions Accessibility
Registered in England & Wales No. 3099067
5 Howick Place | London | SW1P 1WG




Cookies Button
We Care About Your Privacy
We and our 845 partners store and/or access information on a device, such as unique IDs in cookies to process personal data. You may accept or manage your choices by clicking below, including your right to object where legitimate interest is used, or at any time in the privacy policy page. These choices will be signaled to our partners and will not affect browsing data.Privacy Policy
We and our partners process data to provide:
Use precise geolocation data. Actively scan device characteristics for identification. Store and/or access information on a device. Personalised advertising and content, advertising and content measurement, audience research and services development.
List of Partners (vendors)
I Accept
Essential Only
Show Purposes