Loading [MathJax]/jax/output/HTML-CSS/config.js
Your privacy, your choice
We use essential cookies to make sure the site can function. We also use optional cookies for advertising, personalisation of content, usage analysis, and social media.
By accepting optional cookies, you consent to the processing of your personal data - including transfers to third parties. Some third parties are outside of the European Economic Area, with varying standards of data protection.
See our privacy policy for more information on the use of your personal data.
Manage preferences for further information and to change your choices.
Accept all cookies
Reject optional cookies
Skip to main content
Advertisement
Log in
Find a journal
Publish with us
Track your research
Search
Cart
Home The ECPH Encyclopedia of Mining and Metallurgy Reference work entry
Joint Development of Open Pit
Reference work entry
First Online: 01 January 2024
pp 998–999
Cite this reference work entry
The ECPH Encyclopedia of Mining and Metallurgy
Li Jianxiong 
61 Accesses
It is a joint development that adopts two or more development methods at the same time to establish an ore-rock transportation channel from the ground to each working level in the open-pit stope and between each working level. The purpose of joint development is to adapt to complex terrains, solve the technical problems of terrain height difference or large mining depth, improve mining capacity, and reduce mining cost. Common joint development methods include: railway-road joint development, road (railway)–crushing station–belt conveyor joint development, road (railway)–slope skip joint development, and road (railway)–adit chute joint development.
Railway-Road Combined Development
The transfer station is the intermediate link in railway-road combined development. The transfer station generally adopts the transfer platform, intermediate storage yard, and ore bin. The ore transported by automobiles is directly transferred to railway vehicles on the transfer platform, or the ore...
This is a preview of subscription content, log in via an institution to check access.
Further Reading
Editorial Board of Mining Handbook (1988) Mining handbook. Metallurgical Industry Press, Beijing
Google Scholar
  Download references
Author information
Authors and Affiliations
School of Resources and Safety Engineering, Central South University, Changsha, China
Li Jianxiong
Editor information
Editors and Affiliations
Chinese Academy of Engineering, Beijing, Beijing, China
Xu Kuangdi
Rights and permissions
Reprints and permissions
Copyright information
© 2024 Encyclopedia of China Publishing House
About this entry
Cite this entry
Jianxiong, L. (2024). Joint Development of Open Pit. In: Kuangdi, X. (eds) The ECPH Encyclopedia of Mining and Metallurgy. Springer, Singapore. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-99-2086-0_322
Download citation
.RIS.ENW.BIB
DOI
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-99-2086-0_322
Published
06 July 2024
Publisher Name
Springer, Singapore
Print ISBN
978-981-99-2085-3
Online ISBN
978-981-99-2086-0
eBook Packages
Engineering
Reference Module Computer Science and Engineering
Publish with us
Policies and ethics
Access this chapter
Log in via an institution
Institutional subscriptions
Sections
References
Railway-Road Combined Development
Further Reading
Author information
Editor information
Rights and permissions
Copyright information
About this entry
Publish with us
Discover content
Journals A-Z
Books A-Z
Publish with us
Publish your research
Open access publishing
Products and services
Our products
Librarians
Societies
Partners and advertisers
Our imprints
Springer
Nature Portfolio
BMC
Palgrave Macmillan
Apress
Your privacy choices/Manage cookies Your US state privacy rights Accessibility statement Terms and conditions Privacy policy Help and support Cancel contracts here
146.241.125.157
Not affiliated
© 2024 Springer Nature