Journals & Books
Help
Search
My account
Sign in
Access through your institution
Purchase PDF
Article preview
Abstract
Cited by (1)
Non-thermal Food Processing Operations
Unit Operations and Processing Equipment in the Food Industry
A volume in Unit Operations and Processing Equipment in the Food Industry
2023, Pages 55-91
Chapter Three - Applications of ozonation in the food industry
Author links open overlay panel
Şenol İbanoğlu
Show more
Add to Mendeley
Share
Cite
https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-818717-3.00003-2
Get rights and content
Abstract
Ozone is a powerful oxidant and, therefore, a promising agent in food processing since it is an effective agent for many food products by its high reactivity, penetrating ability and leaving non-toxic O2 as process by-product. Ozone has given a generally recognized as safe status by the United States Department of Agriculture (USDA) in 1997 for use as sanitizer in foods. Common examples of ozone treatments in the food industry include surface hygiene, sanitation of plant equipment, reuse of waste water, disinfection of poultry carcasses, improving shelf-life of fruit and vegetables and providing hygienic conditions in storage atmosphere of cereals. Oxidation process with ozone can be very complex thus leading to the formation of primary high reactive species. Ozonation works without any need for thermal energy and thereby saving energy. Also, since ozone is generated on-site at the time of use, there would be no need for transport and storage of any chemicals or reagents, therefore, reducing the total cost of operation at the industrial scale. In this context, ozone can be regarded as a green and environmentally friendly process. In this chapter, the use of ozone in the food processing will be discussed with an emphasis on the meat, cereals, dairy, fruits and vegetables and packaging industries. It is believed that this chapter will be useful for the researchers and the people working in the food industry.
References (0)
Cited by (1)
Environmental Impact of Novel Non-Thermal Technologies
2024, Non-Thermal Technologies for the Food Industry: Advances and Regulations
View full text
Copyright © 2023 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
Recommended articles
Principles of high pressure processing and its equipment
Non-thermal Food Processing Operations, 2023, pp. 301-318
Gulsun Akdemie Evrendilek
Verification of radio frequency pasteurization process for in-shell almonds
Journal of Food Engineering, Volume 192, 2017, pp. 103-110
Rui Li, …, Shaojin Wang
Principles of irradiation and its equipment
Non-thermal Food Processing Operations, 2023, pp. 205-220
Puzhakkal Sruthi, …, Madeneni Madhava Naidu
Show 3 more articles
Article Metrics
Citations
Citation Indexes:
1
Captures
Readers:
17
View details
About ScienceDirect
Remote access
Shopping cart
Advertise
Contact and support
Terms and conditions
Privacy policy
Cookies are used by this site.
Cookie Settings
All content on this site: Copyright © 2024 Elsevier B.V., its licensors, and contributors. All rights are reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. For all open access content, the Creative Commons licensing terms apply.
We use cookies that are necessary to make our site work. We may also use additional cookies to analyze, improve, and personalize our content and your digital experience. For more information, see ourCookie Policy
Cookie Settings
Accept all cookies