Discover
English
AGRIS - International System for Agricultural Science and Technology
About AGRIS
Contribute
Acceptable use policy
Advanced Search
Effect of ozonation on shelf life of French dessert Cannelés liquid dough
2023
Dagyte, Deimante | Zvirdauskiene, Renata | Kersiene, Milda
It is popular to supply ready-made raw semi-finished products to the market, but there are longer storage challenges, especially if it is a liquid dough. Ozone is a powerful disinfectant and is of interest to food scientists, because it can be used to disinfect food and preserve it for longer time. The aim of the study was to evaluate the effect of ozone on the shelf life of Canelés dough. The dough was prepared according to a traditional recipe, all the ingredients of which can be purchased at the supermarket. Two types of dough were made, for the production of which ozonated and non-ozonated flour was used. Later, these doughs were poured into sealed sterile 200 mL vials and one part of doughs was ozonated by passing ozone directly into the vials for 5 minutes. Four types of dough were prepared in 10 replicates for the tests. All samples were stored at 4 ± 2 °C in a refrigerator. Microbiological tests, pH measurements and Canelés baking were performed, once a week, for 6 weeks. The conducted studies show that ozone treatment did not extend the shelf life of liquid dough. Both ozonated and non-ozonated dough deteriorated during storage and became unsuitable for baking: after 2 weeks of storage Canelés from non-ozonated dough deformed during baking, while Canelés from ozonated dough had a more runny consistency. After three weeks, the ozonated dough Canelés stuck to the moulds, and after 4 weeks, none of the doughs were suitable for baking and all the doughs had an unpleasant smell. Non-ozonated dough went mouldy.
Show more [+]
AGROVOC Keywords
cereal flours desserts doughs france keeping quality latvia lithuania measurement microbiological analysis ozonization ph
Bibliographic information
Published in
FoodBalt 2023: 16th Baltic Conference on Food Science and Technology “Traditional Meets Non-Traditional in Future Food”, Jelgava, [Latvia], May 11–12, 2023: Abstract book
Pagination 51 - 51
Publisher LBTU
Language
English
Note
Source : FoodBalt 2023: 16th Baltic Conference on Food Science and Technology “Traditional Meets Non-Traditional in Future Food”, Jelgava, [Latvia], May 11–12, 2023: Abstract book ISSN : 2592-9739 (online) ISSN : 2501-0190 (print) Gen. Note : 1 online resource (132 pages)
Type
Text; Conferencepaper
In AGRIS since: 2023-10-03
Format: MODS
Data Provider
This bibliographic record has been provided by Fundamental Library of Latvia University of Life Sciences and Technologies
Discover this data provider's collection in AGRIS
Links
https://lbtufb.lbtu.lv/conference/foodbalt/2023/FoodBalt_2023_Abstract_book.pdf
Lookup at Google Scholar
If you notice any incorrect information relating to this record, please contact us at agris@fao.org
FOLLOW US ON
FAO Organizational Chart
Worldwide Offices
Jobs Contact us Terms and Conditions Data protection and privacy Scam Alert Report Misconduct
DOWNLOAD OUR APP
© FAO 2023