Search within
Login / Register
ENERGY & ENVIRONMENTAL MATERIALS
Research Article
Open Access
Enhanced Passivation Effect of Tunnel Oxide Prepared by Ozone-Gas Oxidation (OGO) for n-Type Polysilicon Passivated Contact (TOPCon) Solar Cells
Lei Yang BSc, 
Yali Ou BSc, 
Xiang Lv, 
Na Lin, 
Yuheng Zeng, 
Zechen Hu PhD, 
Shuai Yuan, 
Jichun Ye, 
Xuegong Yu PhD, 
Deren Yang
First published: 12 July 2024 https://doi.org/10.1002/eem2.12795
SECTIONS
PDF
TOOLS
SHARE
Abstract
Nowadays, a stack of heavily doped polysilicon (poly-Si) and tunnel oxide (SiOx) is widely employed to improve the passivation performance in n-type tunnel oxide passivated contact (TOPCon) silicon solar cells. In this case, it is critical to develop an in-line advanced fabrication process capable of producing high-quality tunnel SiOx. Herein, an in-line ozone-gas oxidation (OGO) process to prepare the tunnel SiOx is proposed to be applied in n-type TOPCon solar cell fabrication, which has obtained better performance compared with previously reported in-line plasma-assisted N2O oxidation (PANO) process. In order to explore the underlying mechanism, the electrical properties of the OGO and PANO tunnel SiOx are analyzed by deep-level transient spectroscopy technology. Notably, continuous interface states in the band gap are detected for OGO tunnel SiOx, with the interface state densities (Dit) of 1.2 × 1012–3.6 × 1012 cm−2 eV−1 distributed in Ev + (0.15–0.40) eV, which is significantly lower than PANO tunnel SiOx. Furthermore, X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy analysis indicate that the percentage of SiO2 (Si4+) in OGO tunnel SiOx is higher than which in PANO tunnel SiOx. Therefore, we ascribe the lower Dit to the good inhibitory effects on the formation of low-valent silicon oxides during the OGO process. In a nutshell, OGO tunnel SiOx has a great potential to be applied in n-type TOPCon silicon solar cell, which may be available for global photovoltaics industry.
1 Introduction
Inhibiting electron–hole pair (EHP) recombination is regarded crucial to further improve silicon solar cell efficiency.[1-5] To this end, researchers have mainly proposed two types of strategies to mitigate photo-generated carriers' recombination and improve the minority carrier lifetime. One is covering the surface of silicon wafer with a passivation layer like SiOx,[6, 7] a-Si:H,[8, 9] etc., to complete dangling bonds, and thus reduce the density of surface states. This strategy is proposed taking into account that photo-generated carriers generally recombine following the Shockley-Read-Hall (SRH) mechanism at energy levels introduced by surface states in the bandgap.[10, 11] The other is forming field passivation to reduce minority carrier density near silicon surface.[12-14] The concept of tunnel oxide passivated contact (TOPCon) silicon solar cells was proposed and showed excellent performance after adopting the above two strategies in a comprehensive way.[15, 16] It is recognized that the TOPCon solar cell is cost-efficient and well-compatible with the current passivated emitter and rear contact (PERC) solar cell production process.[17, 18] More importantly, TOPCon solar cells based on n-type silicon cannot be susceptible to light-induced degradation caused by boron-oxygen defects (BO-LID).[19, 20] Thus, the n-type TOPCon silicon solar cell has attracted much attention from both academia and industry.
Passivation contact structure of n-type TOPCon solar cells contains a stack of heavily doped polycrystalline silicon (poly-Si) and tunnel SiOx.[21, 22] In the vast majority of cases, the poly-Si film is crystallized from a deposited amorphous silicon film. Nowadays, low-pressure chemical vapor deposition (LPCVD) and plasma-enhanced chemical vapor deposition (PECVD) are widely used technologies for the deposition of amorphous silicon film.[23-26] By contrast with the LPCVD, the PECVD is more competitive due to its advantages of versatility, higher deposition rate, slighter wrap-round deposition, and avoidable contamination on quartz tubes.[27] Note that the graphite boat is the standard carrier of the tubes in the PECVD equipment. Thus, developing a suitable fabrication process for the tunnel SiOx and to be compatible with the graphite boat is of great significance for promoting PECVD technology on a large scale.
Much attention has been paid to investigating assorted preparation methods for tunnel SiOx applied in TOPCon solar cells in the past few years.[28, 29] Indeed, thermal SiOx has the best passivation performance. However, the thermal SiOx always grows at high temperatures, and the graphite-boat is not stable in this environment.[30] With this in mind, the wet chemical oxide grown in a nitric acid bath was developed in the initial n-type TOPCon rear contact, and the superiority of its performance over partial rear contact (PRC) schemes was demonstrated.[6, 31] Thence, other improved wet chemical methods for tunnel SiOx like grown in ozonized deionized-water (DIO3),[15] in diluted hydrochloric acid solution oxidation (WCO-HCl),[32, 33] in Piranha solution (SPM),[34, 35] and so forth have been proposed one after another. However, on the one hand, wet chemical oxides are universally confronted with the problem of inhomogeneity and defects caused by low-valent silicon oxides.[28, 32, 36] On the other hand, the above methods require additional equipment if it is to be combined with PECVD technology. This undoubtedly increases the cost of production. More importantly, considering the chemical instability of the tunnel SiOx in the bare air, the ex-situ process has an adverse effect on the quality of the film. In view of this, our previous work has developed an in-line plasma-assisted N2O oxidation (PANO) method to prepare tunnel SiOx which was applied in n-type TOPCon solar cells successfully.[37] Inspired by the reported UV/O3 process for tunnel SiOx fabrication, we found that the ozone-gas oxidation (OGO) method can realize low-temperature oxidation and is also compatible with PECVD technology.[30] In this work, we report detailed electrical information of interface states about in-line prepared PANO and OGO SiOx based on n-type TOPCon solar cells. Firstly, we compare the defects preliminarily by carrier lifetime tests. Subsequently, we distinguish the interface states from the bulk defects through deep-level transient spectroscopy (DLTS) technology and obtain related electrical properties like the interface state densities (Dit) and the corresponding energy distribution. More essentially, the relationship between the low-valent silicon oxides and the interface defects is analyzed and elaborated unambiguously. The obtained results are of guide significance for the improvement of the tunnel SiOx preparation process in n-type TOPCon solar cells.
2 Results and Discussion
2.1 Morphologies of Tunnel SiOx
The microstructure images of the samples with PANO or OGO SiOx are taken using a high-resolution transmission electron microscope (TEM), as depicted in Figure 1a,b. There is an evident interface between the crystal Si (c-Si) substrate and the poly-Si layer, in which the lattice fringes are clearly visible. Therefore, we can easily distinguish amorphous SiOx and clearly observe that both the SiOx films distribute uniformly across the interface. The thickness of the PANO and OGO SiOx ranges 1.1–1.3 nm and 1.0–1.2 nm, respectively. Note that the oxide layer in this thickness range has good tunneling characteristics.[38] Furthermore, we cannot find obvious disruptions or defects like pinholes exist within the scope of observation. This indicates that both the PANO and OGO methods can obtain tunnel SiOx with good morphology integrity.
Figure 1
Open in figure viewer
PowerPoint
The cross-sectional high-resolution TEM images of the sample with a) PANO and b) OGO SiOx after annealing. Annealing process: 880 °C/30 min in N2 atmosphere.
2.2 Experimental Exploration of Enhanced Passivation Mechanism
Considering that defects with recombination centers like dangling bonds cannot be visually observed in the TEM images, carrier lifetime tests are applied for further characterization. The carrier lifetime mapping, respectively, of the passivated samples with PANO and OGO SiOx fabricated on wafers I, II, and III are shown in Figure 2a. Generally, local as-grown defects may exist in the substrate silicon wafer, and additional damage may be introduced during sample preparation. Therefore, the overall uniformity is acceptable, although the measured results show a certain degree of non-uniformity that needs to be improved. In addition, we can observe that the passivated samples prepared by the OGO method on the same silicon wafer have a higher carrier lifetime than those prepared by the PANO method. Furthermore, corresponding curves of carrier lifetime versus carrier injection level are plotted in Figure 2b. The effective lifetimes of the passivated samples with PANO SiOx are 846, 942, and 1030 μs at the injection concentration of 5 × 1015 cm−3. However, the effective lifetimes of the passivated samples with OGO SiOx are 1540, 1550, and 1680 μs. Consequently, we can reasonably infer that there are less electrically active defects in the sample with OGO SiOx. Note that the preparation processes of poly-Si are identical to those of all the samples mentioned above. In view of this, we propose a speculation that it is the interface-related defects that lead to the difference in values of carrier lifetime.
Figure 2
Open in figure viewer
PowerPoint
a) Carrier lifetime mapping and b) carrier lifetime as a function of carrier injection level of the passivated samples with PANO and OGO SiOx fabricated on wafers I, II, and III. The insert in b) is a schematic diagram of the specific structure prepared for lifetime tests.
With this in mind, we adopt DLTS technology to further investigate the electrical properties of defects in both samples and confirm our speculation. The principle of DLTS technology for testing the electrical properties of defects can be explained through energy band diagrams, as shown in Figure 3a. It is well known that the defect level will be filled with electrons if it resides below the Fermi level, which will be unoccupied otherwise.[39] As shown in Figure 3a, it can be seen that the intersection point of the Fermi level and the interface will move when the applied bias changes from pulse voltage Vp to reverse voltage Vr. During this process, the originally filled holes will emit into the valance band and produce a transient change in capacitance. DLTS technology is to extract defect-related electrical information like defect energy level, density of defect states, etc., by analyzing the produced capacitance transient data during temperature scan.
Figure 3
Open in figure viewer
PowerPoint
a) Schematic energy band diagram of ploy-Si/SiOx/c-Si structure after applying pulse voltage Vp or reverse voltage Vr. The DLTS results for the sample with b) PANO and c) OGO SiOx at different pulse voltages Vp values. The pulse time tp = 1 ms. d) The curve of Dit distributions in band gap for both samples with PANO and OGO SiOx.
Note that a depletion region is necessary for the DLTS samples because the capacitance transient is based on changes in the width of the depletion region. In addition, the leakage current should be as small as possible within the bias range used in the test to ensure the accuracy of the capacitance.[40] Therefore, we choose the PN junction (poly-Si(n+)/SiOx/c-Si(p)) but not the high-low junction (poly-Si(n+)/SiOx/c-Si(n)) for DLTS tests. Note that we do not choose the structure of poly-Si(p+)/SiOx/c-Si(n) because the element doping may have an impact on the passivation effect of the tunnel SiOx, and the layer of poly-Si(n+) is the actual material used in the passivation structure for n-type TOPCon solar cells. Additionally, the type of dopant in the substrate c-Si has limited influence on the interface state density. In this work, we only change the preparation process of the tunnel SiOx layer, and the preparation process of the poly-Si is exactly the same for all samples. Therefore, the impact of the doping and annealing processes of the polysilicon layer on the PANO and OGO tunnel SiOx layers is identical. In view of this, we believe that the different effects of field passivation in interface states-related testing can be excluded.
Figure 3b,c shows the DLTS results of the sample with PANO and OGO SiOx, respectively. Herein, the prepared samples are fabricated on the same wafer. We can observe an interesting phenomenon in both Figure 3b,c; that is, the signal peak shifts to higher temperatures, and the peak value increases when the Vr value increases and the Vp value remains. This is the salient feature of the DLTS signal corresponding to the interface states and is significantly different from the bulk defects.[41] This can be interpreted from the energy band diagram, as depicted in Figure 3a. In general, the bulk defects introduce a single trap level, but the interface states introduce continuous energy levels in the bandgap of c-Si and are localized at the interface.[42, 43] The interface states are represented by continuous thin horizontal lines in Figure 3a. In the case of the Vp remains unchanged, the more and deeper energy levels will be filled by holes if the Vr value is greater, and the higher energy is needed for holes to emit. In other words, more capacitance transients will be detected at higher temperatures with the increase of Vr, that is, the shift of peak position and the change of peak intensity can be obtained in Figure 3b,c. In a word, the characterization of measured DLTS signals confirm our previous speculation about properties of defects when analyzing carrier lifetime data, that is, the sample with PANO and OGO SiOx has different interface states.
The interface state density Dit and corresponding energy levels Et can be calculated from the DLTS signal through Equatios 1 and 2: [44, 45]
E t = E v + kT ln 3.33 × 10 21 σ p T 2 τ
(1)
D it = ε Si C ox A N d Δ C / C r 3 kTβ
(2)
where Ec is the conduction band edge, k is the Boltzmann's constant, T is the Kelvin absolute temperature, σp is the capture cross section of hole with the assumed value as 2 × 10−15 cm2,[44] τ is the electron emission rate constant which can be extracted from capacitance transient data, εSi is the permittivity of silicon, Cox is the oxide capacitance, Nd is the donor doping concentration of silicon substrate, ΔC is the amplitude of capacitance transient, Cr is the equilibrium capacitance value at Vr and β is the energy resolution factor for FT-DLTS with a value of 2.5 here.
Figure 3d shows the plot of Dit for the sample with PANO and OGO SiOx verse Et. The Dit of the sample with PANO SiOx ranges 2.9 × 1012–5.9 × 1012 cm−2 eV−1 and is distributed within Ev + (0.15–0.40) eV. However, The Dit of sample with OGO SiOx ranges 1.2 × 1012–3.6 × 1012 cm−2 eV−1 within Ev + (0.15–0.40) eV. Moreover, we can observe that the Dit of the sample with OGO SiOx is lower than that of the counterpart in all energy levels in the test range, especially at the deep energy levels. Lower Dit values mean less photo-generated carriers' recombination centers at the interface, and the corresponding minority carrier lifetime will be longer. This indicates that the tunnel SiOx prepared by the OGO process has a better passivation effect than the PANO process.
As reported before, the interface of SiOx/c-Si is generally considered as a transition region comprising low-valent silicon oxides like Si2O, SiO, and Si2O3, which will bring about extra defects.[46] Hereby, the X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) characterization was taken to explore whether the difference in the interface states of the sample with PANO and OGO SiOx is due to the difference in the chemical-bonding configurations. XPS spectra were calibrated to 284.8 eV according to the C 1s binding energy for adventitious (aliphatic) carbon.[47] Figure 4a shows the XPS spectra of O 1s for the PANO and OGO SiOx, and the peak of binding energy is about 532.3 eV. Figure 4b shows the full and the deconvolution spectra of the XPS for both the PANO and OGO SiOx. The Si 2p bonding energy is finely analyzed in the range of (98–106) eV. The peaks at 99.0 eV and 99.6 eV correspond to Si 2p3/2 and Si 2p1/2, respectively. The peaks of SiO2 (Si4+) and its sub-stoichiometric species Si2O (Si+), SiO (Si2+), and Si2O3 (Si3+), respectively, shift 3.3–4.8, 0.95, 1.75, and 2.48 eV from the Si 2p3/2 peak.[48] The statistics of Si0+ (Si 2p3/2 and 2p1/2), Si+, Si2+, Si3+, and Si4+ ratios in both samples are plotted in Figure 4c. The deconvolution results reveal that the percentage of Si4+ is 15.7% in PANO and 17.1% in OGO SiOx. We note that the OGO SiOx shows a higher Si4+ proportion than the PANO SiOx, indicating a sufficient degree of oxidation. Based on the analysis data of the interface states mentioned above, we conclude that the OGO process enhances the degree of oxidation and introduces lower Dit in the band gap.
Figure 4
Open in figure viewer
PowerPoint
a, b) XPS spectra of the PANO and OGO SiOx. c) Percentage of the single silicon peaks of PANO and OGO SiOx.
2.3 Solar Cell Validation
Finally, the OGO SiOx is applied to the fabrication of n-type TOPCon solar cells. The device structure and the light J-V curve are given in Figure 5. Our previous work reported the champion performance of the n-type TOPCon solar cell with PANO SiOx had efficiency Eff. of 21.01%, open-circuit voltage Voc of 669 mV, short-circuit current Jsc of 38.70 mA cm−2 and fill factor FF of 81.16%.[37] We compared the data and found that the solar cell with OGO SiOx performs better in all respects. This coincides with our above research results related to interface states indicating the promise of this method, which may be available for further improving the Eff. of industrial n-type TOPCon solar cells in the future.
Figure 5
Open in figure viewer
PowerPoint
The light J-V curve of the n-type TOPCon solar cell with OGO SiOx grown at 400 °C. The insert is the device structure and related performance parameters.
3 Conclusion
In summary, we introduce an in-line OGO process to fabricate tunnel SiOx applied in n-type TOPCon silicon solar cells. In comparison with the samples with PANO SiOx, the ones with OGO SiOx obtain higher minority carrier lifetime, suggesting less recombination centers. Besides, the DLTS results indicate that the Dit for OGO SiOx distributes within Ev + (0.15–0.40) eV with values of 1.2 × 1012–3.6 × 1012 cm−2 eV−1. However, the values of Dit are 2.9 × 1012–5.9 × 1012 cm−2 eV−1 within the same range of energy levels for PANO SiOx. Furthermore, the XPS-related analysis has demonstrated that the OGO SiOx has a higher percentage of SiO2 (Si4+) compared with the PANO SiOx, that is, the OGO method has a more prominent oxidation ability. In other words, the OGO SiOx has less low-valent silicon oxides which leads to a significant enhancement in the passivation effect. Finally, the in-line OGO method is integrated into the n-type TOPCon silicon solar cell fabrication and has obtained a better performance than the in-line PANO method. This work certifies that the in-line OGO method is a promising candidate for tunnel SiOx fabrication in the actual industrial n-type TOPCon solar cell production process, which may be available for the global photovoltaics industry.
4 Experimental Section
A mirror-polished 8-inch n-type wafer with a resistivity of 1–10 Ω•cm and a thickness of 165 μm sliced from a solar-grade Czochralski (Cz) ingot was used as substrate. The wafer was sliced into 4 cm × 4 cm square and textured in potassium hydroxide solution, followed by a standard RCA cleaning process. The samples were immersed in diluted hydrofluoric acid to remove native silicon oxide from the surface. For PANO SiOx, high purity (99.999%) N2O was utilized as an oxygen source, and the substrate temperature was set as 200 °C. Note that the process parameters used here are the optimal data that we have optimized before.[37] For OGO SiOx, we used an ozone generator to produce high-concentration ozone gas and transported it into the furnace with a concentration of 400 mg L−1 which was controlled via a flow valve. Note that the temperature and the time of the heat treatment were 400 °C and 10 min, respectively. Identically, the process of preparing tunnel SiOx by the OGO method has also been optimized.
For carrier lifetime tests, we selected three different silicon wafers. After the RCA cleaning process, the PANO and OGO SiOx film was grown on both sides of the samples sliced from the same silicon wafer. Subsequently, a layer of phosphorus-doped amorphous with a thickness of about 20 nm was deposited on both sides of the two types of tunnel SiOx-coated wafers in an RF PECVD system. The prepared samples were annealed at 880 °C in an N2 atmosphere for 30 min to crystallize amorphous silicon and activate the dopant. The lifetime mappings were measured and calibrated in a commercial BT Imaging LIS-R1PL imaging system. In addition, the minority carrier lifetime as a function of carrier injection lifetime level was examined using quasi-steady-state photoconductance (QSSPC) (Sinton WCT-120) measurements.
For DLTS tests, p-type wafer with a resistivity of 1–10 Ω•cm was used for the substrate. After the RCA cleaning process, the PANO and OGO SiOx film was grown on the silicon wafer. Subsequently, a layer of phosphorus-doped amorphous with a thickness of about 20 nm was deposited on the two types of tunnel SiOx-coated wafers in an RF PECVD system. The prepared samples were annealed at 880 °C in an N2 atmosphere for 30 min to crystallize amorphous silicon and activate the dopant. Note that the preparation process of the poly-Si is exactly the same for all samples, with the aim of excluding the different effects of element doping or field passivation in interface states-related testing as far as possible. Then, a 150-nm gold electrode with a diameter of 1 mm was evaporated on the phosphorus-doped poly-Si layer, and the InGa eutectic solution was rubbed on the back of the substrate to form ohmic contact. The DLTS tests were conducted in a Bio-Rad DL8000 digital deep-level transient spectroscopy system (1 MHz).
For high-resolution transmission electron microscope (TEM) tests, polymethyl methacrylate (PMMA) of about 20 nm was spin-coated on the poly-Si as a protective layer. TEM samples were prepared by focused ion beam (FIB) with an FEI Quanta 3D FEG. Firstly, a protecting layer of Pt (about 80 nm) was deposited by an e-beam on the PMMA layer, followed by a thicker Pt layer of about 2 μm deposited by an ion beam at the same position. Note that both PANO and OGO samples were extracted from the faces of the textured structure. Secondly, a lamella with a thickness of about 2 μm was prepared after digging, cutting, and lifting by ion beam at 30 kV. Subsequently, the lamella was polished to a thickness suitable for TEM observation (about 800 nm) using an appropriate ion polishing system. Finally, surface damage was removed by an ion beam at 2 kV.
The fabrication procedures of the TOPCon solar cells with an area of 2 cm × 2 cm are introduced as follows. High-temperature (900–1000 °C) BBr3 diffusion was taken in a Tempress furnace to form a P+ emitter followed by potassium hydroxide etching. The rear tunnel SiOx was prepared using the OGO process introduced above. The phosphorus-doped amorphous silicon film was deposited, and crystallization annealing was done subsequently. The front side is capped by a stack of the atomic-layer-deposited (ALD) Al2O3 layer and the PECVD-deposited SiNx layer. Finally, the front Ti/Pd/Ag electrode pattern and the rear Ag full area electrode are fabricated, followed by belt-furnace firing.
Acknowledgements
L. Yang and Y. OU contributed equally to this work. This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Nos. 62025403 and U23A20354), the Natural Science Foundation of Zhejiang Province (LD22E020001), “Pioneer” and “Leading Goose” R&D Program of Zhejiang (2022C01215, 2024C01055) and the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (226-2022-00200).
Conflict of Interest
The authors declare no conflict of interests.
References
Early View
Online Version of Record before inclusion in an issue
e12795
Figures
References
Related
Information
Download PDF
Additional links
ABOUT WILEY ONLINE LIBRARY
Privacy Policy
Terms of Use
About Cookies
Manage Cookies
Accessibility
Wiley Research DE&I Statement and Publishing Policies
Developing World Access
HELP & SUPPORT
Contact Us
Training and Support
DMCA & Reporting Piracy
OPPORTUNITIES
Subscription Agents
Advertisers & Corporate Partners
CONNECT WITH WILEY
The Wiley Network
Wiley Press Room
Copyright © 1999-2024 John Wiley & Sons, Inc or related companies. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence technologies or similar technologies.