Product & Services
Subscribe
Submit a paper
Browse
Rankings
Blog↗
Contact
Create account
Sign in
  This is a preprint article, it offers immediate access but has not been peer reviewed.
Download This Paper
Open PDF in Browser
Add Paper to My Library
Share:
A Mechanistic Model for Ozone Decomposition Processes in Secondary Wastewater Effluent with Initial Ozone Demand
49 Pages Posted: 26 Jun 2024
Kourosh Nasr Esfahani
affiliation not provided to SSRN
Domenico Santoro
Western University
Montserrat Pérez-Moya
affiliation not provided to SSRN
Moisès Graells
affiliation not provided to SSRN
Abstract
Ozone-based processes involve complex reactions networks and exhibit matrix-dependent decomposition patterns when dosed on wastewater effluents. Existing models for ozone decomposition are either too complex or not sufficiently descriptive of the regime manifested during initial ozone demand and decay. Models incorporating detailed reactions have shown limited applicability due to the high number of initial states and state variables involved. This study introduces a new mathematical model aimed at balancing accuracy and complexity in describing the main phases of ozone decomposition in a secondary wastewater effluent. Specifically, a simplified model is proposed based on lumped variables which include initial ozone demand, two classes of organic matter (slow and fast reacting), radical forming (and ozone-decomposing) compounds, radical scavengers, and a hypothetical target contaminant. Results revealed that the model can predict with good accuracy both the rapid initial ozone demand (occurring at very short timescales <10 s) and the slower ozone decomposition processes (occurring at longer timescales >30 s). A global sensitivity analysis was also conducted to further model refinement and simplification, which led to the elimination of three reactions connected to the generation and consumption of radicals (threshold |R_XY| ≥ 0.05). Satisfactorily low residual values (RMSE≤7·10-6 mM) were observed in all cases. Finally, the adequacy of the model was further tested against an independent set of ozone decomposition experiments obtained from the literature, confirming its suitability in describing ozone decomposition in secondary wastewater effluents with initial ozone demand.
Keywords: Ozonation Process, Modelling, Parameter Estimation, Sensitivity Analysis, Ozone Decomposition, Organic Matter
Suggested Citation:
Nasr Esfahani, Kourosh and Santoro, Domenico and Pérez-Moya, Montserrat and Graells, Moisès, A Mechanistic Model for Ozone Decomposition Processes in Secondary Wastewater Effluent with Initial Ozone Demand. Available at SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4877655 or http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.4877655






Download This Paper
Open PDF in Browser
62 References
References
N Askari , M Beheshti , D Mowla , M Farhadian
Synthesis of CuWO4/Bi2S3 Zscheme heterojunction with enhanced cephalexin photodegradation
J Photochem Photobiol A Chem , volume 394 Posted: 2020
S Ledakowicz , M Solecka , R Zylla
Biodegradation, decolourisation and detoxification of textile wastewater enhanced by advanced oxidation processes
J Biotechnol , volume 89 , p. 296 - 296 Posted: 2001
N Askari , M Jamalzadeh , A Askari , N Liu , B Samali , M Sillanpaa , L Sheppard , H Li , R Dewil
Unveiling the photocatalytic marvels: Recent advances in solar heterojunctions for environmental remediation and energy harvesting
Journal of Environmental Sciences , volume 148 , p. 283 - 297 Posted: 2025
Load more
0 Citations
Do you have a job opening that you would like to promote on SSRN?
Place Job Opening
Paper statistics
DOWNLOADS
3
ABSTRACT VIEWS
16
62 References
PlumX Metrics
Feedback
Submit a Paper
Section 508 Text Only Pages
SSRN Quick Links
SSRN Solutions
Research Paper Series
Conference Papers
Partners in Publishing
Jobs & Announcements
Special Topic Hubs
SSRN Rankings
Top Papers
Top Authors
Top Organizations
About SSRN
Network Directors
Announcements
Contact us
FAQs
Copyright Terms and Conditions Privacy Policy
All content on this site: Copyright © 2023 Elsevier Inc., its licensors, and contributors. All rights are reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. For all open access content, the Creative Commons licensing terms apply.
We use cookies to help provide and enhance our service and tailor content.
To learn more, visit Cookie Settings.
We use cookies that are necessary to make our site work. We may also use additional cookies to analyze, improve, and personalize our content and your digital experience. For more information, see ourCookie Policy
Cookie Settings
Accept all cookies