Product & Services
Subscribe
Submit a paper
Browse
Rankings
Blog↗
Contact
Create account
Sign in
  This is a preprint article, it offers immediate access but has not been peer reviewed.
Download This Paper
Open PDF in Browser
Add Paper to My Library
Share:
Non-Methane Volatile Organic Compound Sources and Sinks in England and Scotland, UK
31 Pages Posted: 8 Jul 2024
Ibrahim Ouchena
affiliation not provided to SSRN
Sarkawt Hama
University of Sulaimani
K.P. Wyche
University of Brighton
Mohamed Mastere
affiliation not provided to SSRN
Abstract
Non-methane volatile organic compounds (NMVOCs) in the atmosphere have garnered considerable attention worldwide because of their significance in atmospheric chemistry and their usefulness in identifying emission sources and chemical sinks. Despite the importance of VOCs, their routine measurement in the UK and across Europe is somewhat limited, and as such there is limited information available regarding their sources, particularly in sensitive locations such as densely populated urban areas. Given the variety and quantity of VOC species, their emissions are often not well understood. Marylebone and Eltham sites are influenced by VOC concentrations, as evidenced by significantly higher levels of alkanes, alkenes, and aromatic hydrocarbons compared to the rural sites of Chilbolton and Auchencorth. The highest VOC values being recorded at the Marylebone and Eltham monitoring sites, were 29.7±14.9 and 16.3 ± 10.5 µg m-3, respectively. Ethane (C₂H₆) and propane (C₃H₈) show higher OFP values at Marylebone Road. The contribution of ethane to ozone formation ranges from 4% in Eltham to 8% in Chilbolton. This indicates that the emissions from vehicles and industries have a greater impact on the reactivity of these compounds. The potential source contribution function (PSCF) showed that Marylebone and Eltham sites are impacted by local sources, mainly from traffic, while Chilbolton and Auchencorth have VOC sources from wider geographical areas. The overall spatial distribution showed that VOCs emissions were relatively low at the Chilbolton and Auchencorth sites, while emissions were high at the Marylebone, and the spatial distribution characteristics of OFP were similar to those of VOCs emissions.
Keywords: NMVOCs, Seasonal characteristics, Spatial variation, Ozone formation potential, PSCF
Suggested Citation:
Ouchena, Ibrahim and Hama, Sarkawt and Wyche, K.P. and Mastere, Mohamed, Non-Methane Volatile Organic Compound Sources and Sinks in England and Scotland, UK. Available at SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4888222 or http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.4888222








Download This Paper
Open PDF in Browser
49 References
W Alahamade , I Lake , C E Reeves , B De La Iglesia
Evaluation of multi-variate time series clustering for imputation of air pollution data. Geoscientific Instrumentation, Methods and Data Systems Discussions , volume 2021 , p. 1 - 23 Posted: 2021
Alastair C Lewis , Jim R Hopkins , David C Carslaw , Jacqueline F Hamilton , Beth S Nelson , Gareth Stewart , James Dernie , Neil Passant , Tim Murrells
An increasing role for solvent emissions and implications for future measurements of volatile organic compounds royal society publishing
Soc. A , volume 378 Posted: 2020
L L Ashbaugh , W C Malm , W Z Sadeh
A residence time probability analysis of sulfur concentrations at Grand Canyon National Park
Atmospheric Environment , volume 19 , p. 1263 - 1270 Posted: 1967
R Atkinson , J Arey
Gas-phase tropospheric chemistry of biogenic volatile organic compounds: a review
Atmospheric Environment , volume 37 , p. 197 - 219 Posted: 2003
Load more
0 Citations
Do you have a job opening that you would like to promote on SSRN?
Place Job Opening
Paper statistics
DOWNLOADS
3
ABSTRACT VIEWS
13
49 References
PlumX Metrics
Related eJournals
Environmental Chemistry eJournal
Follow
Feedback
Submit a Paper
Section 508 Text Only Pages
SSRN Quick Links
SSRN Solutions
Research Paper Series
Conference Papers
Partners in Publishing
Jobs & Announcements
Special Topic Hubs
SSRN Rankings
Top Papers
Top Authors
Top Organizations
About SSRN
Network Directors
Announcements
Contact us
FAQs
Copyright Terms and Conditions Privacy Policy
All content on this site: Copyright © 2023 Elsevier Inc., its licensors, and contributors. All rights are reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. For all open access content, the Creative Commons licensing terms apply.
We use cookies to help provide and enhance our service and tailor content.
To learn more, visit Cookie Settings.
We use cookies that are necessary to make our site work. We may also use additional cookies to analyze, improve, and personalize our content and your digital experience. For more information, see ourCookie Policy
Cookie Settings
Accept all cookies