Your Privacy
We use cookies to make sure that our website works properly, as well as some 'optional' cookies to personalise content and advertising, provide social media features and analyse how people use our site. By accepting some or all optional cookies you give consent to the processing of your personal data, including transfer to third parties, some in countries outside of the European Economic Area that do not offer the same data protection standards as the country where you live. You can decide which optional cookies to accept by clicking on 'Manage preferences', where you can also find more information about how your personal data is processed. Further information can be found in our privacy policy.
Accept all cookies
Manage preferences
Browse
Tools & Services
About
Sign In
Submit a Preprint
Research Article
Development of a Highly Efficient Technology for Accelerated Bread Production
Sholpan Arystanbekovna Tursunbayeva, Auyelbek Iztayevich Iztayev, and 4 more
This is a preprint; it has not been peer reviewed by a journal.
https://doi.org/10.21203/rs.3.rs-533673/v1
This work is licensed under a CC BY 4.0 License
Abstract
The bakery market is one of the most capacious in Kazakhstan. Manufacturers of bread products are in dire need of the introduction of intensive technologies for improving product quality and safety. This article presents the results of research to develop technology for accelerated production of bread with ion-ozone cavitation treatment. The influence of various modes of exposure to ion-ozone cavitation has been investigated. After baking, bread samples were examined for organoleptic, physicochemical, rheological and microbiological indicators. The optimal method is treatment with ion-ozone at a concentration of 0.0025 units/mg, at a pressure of 1.0 atm for 1 min. As a result, it was proved that this mode accelerates the process of obtaining dough and shortens the fermentation time, and baking bread increases the qualitative and quantitative indicators according to the control method. The results showed that the ion-ozone technology reduces the length of the process of making dough and bread by three times compared to traditional technologies. The developed products with existing analogues in the Kazakhstan market will differ due to their high taste and consumer properties, product safety, long shelf life and low cost.
Food Science & Technology
wheat
wholemeal flour
cavitation
ion-ozone treatment
bread
accelerated bread making
Figures
Introduction
Research Results
Discussion
Materials And Methods
Declarations
References
Additional Declarations
Cite
Share
PDF
Status:
Under Review
Version 1
posted 20 May, 2021
Editorial decision: Major revision
09 Aug, 2021
Reviews received at journal
20 Jun, 2021
Reviewers agreed at journal
07 Jun, 2021
Reviewers invited by journal
05 Jun, 2021
Editor assigned by journal
31 May, 2021
Editor invited by journal
18 May, 2021
Submission checks completed at journal
18 May, 2021
First submitted to journal
17 May, 2021
You are reading this latest preprint version
Research Square lets you share your work early, gain feedback from the community, and start making changes to your manuscript prior to peer review in a journal.
As a division of Research Square Company, we’re committed to making research communication faster, fairer, and more useful. We do this by developing innovative software and high quality services for the global research community. Our growing team is made up of researchers and industry professionals working together to solve the most critical problems facing scientific publishing.
Also discoverable on
PLATFORM
About
Our Team
In Review
Editorial Policies
Advisory Board
Contact Us
Help Center
RESOURCES
Author Services
Research Quality Evaluation
Blog
Accessibility
API Access
RSS feed
Cookies Settings
COMPANY
About Us
Careers
Partner With Us
Responsibility
Press
© Research Square 2024 | ISSN 2693-5015 (online)
Privacy Policy
Terms of Service
Do Not Sell My Personal Information
By clicking “Accept All Cookies”, you agree to the storing of cookies on your device to enhance site navigation, analyze site usage, and assist in our marketing efforts. Privacy Policy
Cookies Settings Accept All Cookies