Your privacy, your choice
We use essential cookies to make sure the site can function. We, and our 209 partners, also use optional cookies and similar technologies for advertising, personalisation of content, usage analysis, and social media.
By accepting optional cookies, you consent to allowing us and our partners to store and access personal data on your device, such as browsing behaviour and unique identifiers. Some third parties are outside of the European Economic Area, with varying standards of data protection. See our privacy policy for more information on the use of your personal data. Your consent choices apply to nature.com and applicable subdomains.
You can find further information, and change your preferences via 'Manage preferences'.
You can also change your preferences or withdraw consent at any time via 'Your privacy choices', found in the footer of every page.
We use cookies and similar technologies for the following purposes:
Store and/or access information on a device
Personalised advertising and content, advertising and content measurement, audience research and services development
Accept all cookies
Reject optional cookies
Manage preferences
Skip to main content
Advertisement
View all journals
Search
Log in
Explore content
About the journal
Publish with us
Sign up for alerts
RSS feed
nature scientific reports articles article
Article
Open access
Published: 20 October 2023
The innovative technology of dough preparation for bread by the accelerated ion–ozone cavitation method
Auyelbek Iztayev, Talgat Kulazhanov, Galiya Iskakova, Mariam Alimardanova, Saule Zhienbaeva, Baurzhan Iztayev, Sholpan Tursunbayeva & Madina Yakiyayeva
  Scientific Reports
 13, Article number: 17937 (2023) Cite this article
1133 Accesses
1 Citations
Metrics
Abstract
Due to the fact that bakery, pasta and flour confectionery products are produced mainly from premium or first-grade flour, which is poor in the content of nutrients and fiber, the issue of developing technology for new types of flour products based on whole-ground flour of different fineness is very relevant and in demand. In the production of wholemeal flour, all parts of the whole grain are used—germ, grain shells, and endosperm. Also, recently the shortage of quality wheat has been growing. Therefore, the use of whole-milled flour from low-class wheat varieties will solve the problem of meeting the needs of the population. Using ion–ozone technology for preparing bread, high-quality bakery products from third-class flour with high nutritional and biological value were obtained. Using the obtained system of equations and constraints, the optimal modes of ion–ozone cavitation processing of dough were determined by a nonlinear programming method, which, subject to all the constraints (limitations) on the dough quality, provided the maximum dough strength of y2 = 181.0% and the dough parameter values of C × 10–4 = 25 units/mg, P = 1 atm, and τ = 5 min, which, in compliance with all constraints (restrictions) on the bread quality, provided a maximum volume of z11 = 232.1 cm3. A new innovative technology was created to increase productivity, efficiency and shorten the preparation time of bread. The method of making bread with the effect of ion–ozone cavitation of dough is very important for the bread industry, which affects the effectiveness of whole wheat flour obtained from the lower class of wheat, increases the quality of bread, shortens the technological processes of production, and increases labor productivity indicators. This method increases the economic efficiency of bread-making industries and the productivity of bread.
Similar content being viewed by others
Development of a highly efficient ion-ozone cavitation technology for accelerated bread production
Article Open access
27 September 2021
Pilot study on the use of cold atmospheric plasma for preservation of bread
Article Open access
20 December 2022
Application of dielectric barrier discharge for improving food shelf life and reducing spoilage
Article Open access
28 September 2021
Introduction
The main requirement of flour production is paying much attention to the flour and bread properties of wheat. Over the next decade, the production volume of high-quality wheat of the first and second classes will decrease by 8–10%, that of the medium or third class will comprise 70%, and that belonging to the fourth and fifth classes will increase by 20%1,2. Wheat classification provides for the main 5 classes. Classes from the first to the third are combined into group “A”, and the letter “B” denotes wheat of the fourth and fifth classes. Assignment to one group or another depends on the content of basic substances in the grains:
protein—protein necessary for nutrition.
gluten—improves baking properties.
1st class wheat contains 40% protein and 30% gluten, 2nd class wheat contains 13% protein and 27% gluten. The composition allows the use of grain in bakery production. Grade 3 wheat contains 12% protein and 23% gluten. 1–3 classes of wheat are included in group “A”. This is food wheat, which is used in the flour-grinding and baking industries.
4th grade wheat contains 18% protein and 11% gluten and 5th grade wheat contains 18% protein and 10% gluten. Classes 4 and 5 are included in group “B”. Usually these are hard varieties, which are also used for making cereals and pasta, but, unlike group “A”, they require saturation with strong varieties. The problem is that Group B varieties lack their own amount of gluten and proteins. These classes are also used for non-food purposes3,4,5,6,7.
Human consumption of high-quality wheat continues to increase, with the greatest growth expected in Asia, where the regional total accounts for almost 60% of global food use. Also, according to experts, the ongoing processes of global warming on the planet are affecting the decrease in the yield of many agricultural crops, in particular wheat. Therefore, it is necessary to use low-grade wheat for the production of bakery products8,9,10.
In baking technology, the process of proofing the dough is key, as it ensures the porosity, taste, and aroma of the finished product. In baking, biological, chemical, and mechanical methods are utilized for relaxing the dough depending on the variety. The peculiarity of the biological method of dough proofing is that sugars added to the dough are fermented to produce alcohol and gas. Carbon dioxide formed in the dough provides a porous structure11,12,13.
When utilizing the biological method, the dough must be relaxed for a sufficient amount of time to ensure the required quality of the finished product. During this method, several biochemical and microbiological processes take place in the dough, resulting in the accumulation of substances that confer porosity, volume, taste, and aroma on the final product. The biological method, despite its inherent technological shortcomings and economic costs, has been the main method of dough preparation for bakery products for a long time. Compressed, dried, active yeast, and fermented milk are used as biological leavening agents. In addition to compressed yeast, liquid yeast prepared in the bakery is utilized14,15,16,17.
The dough preparation method is chosen depending on the type and grade of flour being processed, its baking properties, the loosening method and the equipment used. Wheat flour dough is prepared with pressed, dry and liquid yeast, as well as with yeast milk obtained directly from the yeast factory. Obtaining high-quality flour from wheat of the third, fourth, and fifth classes is needed to make bread suitable for consumption. To solve this problem, a new technology of innovative bread making must be created, producing high-quality bread from different types of flour18,19,20. It is technologically possible to produce bread even from flours of slightly lower quality. Moreover, the time required to make bread through the use of traditional technology is up to 4–5 h, which reduces productivity, worsens the social situation, and does not ensure the baking of bread from low-quality flour. In this regard, the use of yeast, including a biological method, prolongs the time of the nanoproduct emergence and has a low probability of improving health21,22,23.
A considerable advantage of wholemeal bread is the amount of dietary fiber it contains. Dietary fiber promotes colon function and health, prevents constipation, and reduces the risk of colon cancer24,25,26. Yeasts contribute significantly to the aroma of bread by forming organic acids, alcohols, ketones, aldehydes, esters, and sulfur-containing compounds, including simple, non-dividing yeasts. Yeast-based bread products can be included in the diets of patients with gluten enteropathy in the case of a properly designed technological scheme and after testing whether the patient’s body can accept such products27,28,29.
Dough preparation methods can be multi-phase, including a pre-preparation stage and the preparation of special semi-finished products, which may differ in moisture content and microflora composition. Methods of preparing the dough can also be single-phase, including unpaired and accelerated methods. The essence of accelerated cooking methods is to strengthen the microbiological, colloidal, and biochemical processes occurring when cooking the dough. It is advisable to utilize quick methods in the production of bread and buns from wheat flour of high and first grade30,31,32.
Taking into account the need to solve these problems, new techniques of developing modern technologies must be proposed for the complex enrichment of the key nutrients of bread products, along with a new technology for baking bread with high nutritional and biological value based on using flour obtained from the lower classes of soft wheat with ion–ozone cavitation and ion–ozone water. To this end, research and development are required33,34,35.
Changes in socioeconomic conditions have led to considerable changes in the social status of various groups of the population. Non-observance of the main criterion of rational nutrition (balance) of the population is a major reason for the widespread of cardiovascular and oncological diseases, obesity, diabetes, allergies, and other diseases that determine demographic processes and public health indicators36,37,38,39.
In order to solve the scientific problem, a theoretical analysis of the principles of biological and mechanical kneading of the dough and the final products of the resulting processes was carried out, the features were identified, and a scientific basis was given for the use of mechanical kneading of semi-finished products. The physicochemical characteristics of foam masses, functional properties of the main components of flour and their role in the formation of stability of foaming and dispersion systems, and the rheological properties of dough are presented40,41.
There are known methods for mechanically loosening dough by churning part of it42,43, which consists of the following: part of the dough (in a relatively liquid and cold state) is churned for 5 min in a special churning machine of a durable and heavy design. After a short break, the kneaded mass is fed into a conventional kneading machine, in which the dough is kneaded, which is then sent for cutting and baking. However, these methods were used only for preparing dough from wheat flour and were not used in industry.
An analogue for the creation of innovative equipment and technology for functional bakery products with a shortened production cycle is the development of technology for aerated functional bread from wheat flour by scientists from the Voronezh State Technological University of Engineering Technologies44. The essence of the developed technology is as follows: in the first stage, the preparation of raw materials for production and dosing is carried out, in the second stage, the components are mixed for 9–10 min at a rotation speed of the kneading body of 5 s−1 in a HVA mixing machine, at the third stage, the dough is kneaded under pressure of 0.40 MPa for 10 min at a rotation speed of the kneading body of 10 s−1 in a hermetically sealed 2-chamber whipping installation made from first-grade wheat flour and additional raw materials according to the recipe; at the fourth stage, the kneaded dough is divided and sent for baking, The fifth stage involves packaging and storage.
In recent years, ozone, ions, ozone, ion–ozone and electronic technology, which have a number of advantages over special additives and technologies, are increasingly being used in the food industry. The use of ion–ozone technology agents with many useful properties (bactericidal, redox, etc.) in food production is the latest trend and represents a promising direction in food production. Currently, scientists of the Almaty Technological University are researching the use of ozonated, ionized and ion-ozonated water in the production of flour, bakery, pasta, flour confectionery products from wheat flour and flour from a mixture of wheat, grains, oilseeds and legumes, allowing to improve the quality, safety and environmental cleanliness of finished products.
Ozone has several undeniable advantages over other disinfectants. In particular, ozone is utilized for inactivating bacteria, bacterial spores, fungi, and viruses and is much more effective than formaldehyde, chlorine, ethylene oxide, etc45,46.
When using ozone in the food industry, it is worth considering the characteristics of the effect of