Product & Services
Subscribe
Submit a paper
Browse
Rankings
Blog↗
Contact
Create account
Sign in
  This is a preprint article, it offers immediate access but has not been peer reviewed.
Download This Paper
Open PDF in Browser
Add Paper to My Library
Share:
The Role of Telomere Shortening in Ambient Ozone Exposure-Related Insulin Resistance
30 Pages Posted: 9 Jul 2024
Ruiying Li
Zhengzhou University
Gongbo Chen
Sun Yat-Sen University (SYSU) - Guangzhou Key Laboratory of Environmental Pollution and Health Risk Assessment
Wei Liao
Zhengzhou University - Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics
Yinghao Yuchi
Zhengzhou University
Xiaohuan Yang
Zhengzhou University
Ziyuan Zhang
Zhengzhou University
Xiaotian Liu
Zhengzhou University - Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics
Zhenxing Mao
Zhengzhou University - Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics
Linlin Li
Zhengzhou University
Jiahui Zhao
Xinxiang Medical University
Huijun Li
Xinxiang Medical University
Wenqian Huo
Zhengzhou University - Department of Occupational and Environmental Health Sciences
Yuming Guo
Monash University - Department of Epidemiology and Preventive Medicine
Shanshan Li
Monash University - Department of Epidemiology and Preventive Medicine
Chongjian Wang
Zhengzhou University - Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics
Jian Hou
Zhengzhou University - Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics
Abstract
Background: Ozone (O3) exposure and telomere shortening are associated with insulin resistance (IR). However, the role of telomere shortening in ambient O3 exposure-related IR is largely unclear.Methods: Participants were derived from the Henan Rural Cohort and their O3 exposure were estimated by a random forest method. IR was reflected by homeostasis model assessment-IR, quantitative insulin sensitivity check index, triglyceride and glucose index, etc. The role of relative telomere length (RTL) in associations of O3 exposure with longitudinal IR markers and their change rates were explored by generalized linear model and quantile regression model. Furthermore, the role of telomere homeostasis in O3-exposure-induced IR in C57BL/6J male mice were verified.Results: O3 exposure was positively associated with longitudinal IR. The proportions of RTL mediated the associations between O3 exposure and longitudinal IR markers were ranged from 11.92% to 60.36%. O3-exposed mice exhibited a higher glucose load, upregulation of GSK-3β and G-6-Pase expression at mRNA levels, glycogen accumulation reduction, telomere shortening, and decreased telomerase reverse transcriptase activity relative to air-exposed mice.Conclusions: Impaired telomere homeostasis may be involved in O3 exposure-related IR via inhibition of glycogen synthesis and acceleration of gluconeogenesis and the specific mechanisms are still further elucidated.
Note:
Funding declaration: This research was supported by the Natural Science Foundation of Henan Province (Grant NO: 23230042151), China Postdoctoral Science Foundation (Grant NO: 2019M662548), the Science and Technique Foundation of Henan Province (Grant NO: 222102320029), National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant NO: 81930092), Science and Technology Innovation Team Support Plan of Colleges and Universities in Henan Province (Grant NO: 21IRTSTHN029), Foundation of National Key Program of Research and Development of China (Grant NO: 2016YFC0900803).

Conflict of Interests: The authors report no conflict of interest.

Ethical Approval: Prior to carry out the Henan Rural Cohort, the ethical approval from Zhengzhou University Life Science Ethics Committee was obtained and the informed written consent was obtained from each participant. All animal experiments were conducted in accordance with the Guidelines of Zhengzhou University for Animal Experiments and approved by the Life Science Institutional Review Board of Zhengzhou University (Approval No. ZZUIRB2021–62).

Keywords: insulin resistance, ambient ozone pollution, telomere length, liver gluconeogenesis
Suggested Citation:
Li, Ruiying and Chen, Gongbo and Liao, Wei and Yuchi, Yinghao and Yang, Xiaohuan and Zhang, Ziyuan and Liu, Xiaotian and Mao, Zhenxing and Li, Linlin and Zhao, Jiahui and Li, Huijun and Huo, Wenqian and Guo, Yuming and Li, Shanshan and Wang, Chongjian and Hou, Jian, The Role of Telomere Shortening in Ambient Ozone Exposure-Related Insulin Resistance. Available at SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4880645 or http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.4880645
























Download This Paper
Open PDF in Browser
40 References
A J Cohen
Estimates and 25-year trends of the global burden of disease attributable to ambient air pollution: an analysis of data from the Global Burden of Diseases Study
Lancet , volume 389 , p. 30505 - 30506 Posted: 2015
G B D Diabetes
Air Pollution, C., 2022. Estimates, trends, and drivers of the global burden of type 2 diabetes attributable to PM(2.5) air pollution, 1990-2019: an analysis of data from the Global Burden of Disease Study
Lancet Planet Health , volume 6 , p. 586 - e600 Posted: 2019
Y Shen
Long-Term Exposure to Fine Particulate Matter and Fasting Blood Glucose and Diabetes in 20 Million Chinese Women of Reproductive Age
Diabetes Care Posted: 2024
G B D R F Collaborators
Global burden of 87 risk factors in 204 countries and territories, 1990-2019: a systematic analysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study
Lancet , volume 396 , p. 1223 - 1249 Posted: 2019
Load more
0 Citations
Do you have a job opening that you would like to promote on SSRN?
Place Job Opening
Paper statistics
DOWNLOADS
7
ABSTRACT VIEWS
40
40 References
PlumX Metrics
Related eJournals
Planetary Health eJournal
Follow
Diabetes & Endocrinology eJournal
Follow
Feedback
Submit a Paper
Section 508 Text Only Pages
SSRN Quick Links
SSRN Solutions
Research Paper Series
Conference Papers
Partners in Publishing
Jobs & Announcements
Special Topic Hubs
SSRN Rankings
Top Papers
Top Authors
Top Organizations
About SSRN
Network Directors
Announcements
Contact us
FAQs
Copyright Terms and Conditions Privacy Policy
All content on this site: Copyright © 2023 Elsevier Inc., its licensors, and contributors. All rights are reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. For all open access content, the Creative Commons licensing terms apply.
We use cookies to help provide and enhance our service and tailor content.
To learn more, visit Cookie Settings.
We use cookies that are necessary to make our site work. We may also use additional cookies to analyze, improve, and personalize our content and your digital experience. For more information, see ourCookie Policy
Cookie Settings
Accept all cookies