Journals & Books
Help
Search
My account
Sign in
Access through your institution
Purchase PDF
Article preview
Abstract
Introduction
Section snippets
References (19)
Cited by (182)
Journal of Stored Products Research
Volume 39, Issue 1
, 2003, Pages 33-44
Penetration of ozone into columns of stored grains and effects on chemical composition and processing performance
Author links open overlay panel
F Mendez a
,
D.E Maier b
,
L.J Mason c
,
C.P Woloshuk a
Show more
Add to Mendeley
Share
Cite
https://doi.org/10.1016/S0022-474X(02)00015-2
Get rights and content
Abstract
Previous investigations have indicated the effectiveness of ozonation to control insects and fungi in stored grain. To further evaluate the efficacy of ozone for pest control, the current study investigated the flow characteristics of ozone through a less porous grain than maize such as wheat, and the effects of long exposure to a high ozone concentration (50 ppm) on grain quality for end-users of the grain. The flow of ozone through a 3-m column of wheat was similar to that previously observed for maize, having a Phase 1 in which the ozone rapidly degraded as the ozone front moved through the grain and a Phase 2 in which the ozone moved freely through the grain with little degradation. Increasing the velocity of ozone flow from 0.02 to 0.04 m/s facilitated deeper penetration of wheat in a Phase 1 state. Treatment of grains with 50 ppm ozone for 30 d had no detrimental effect on popping volume of popcorn, fatty acid and amino acid composition of soybean, wheat, and maize, milling characteristics of wheat and maize, baking characteristics of wheat, and stickiness of rice. These data indicate that, if repeated ozone treatments are needed, such treatment should not decrease the quality of grain for end-users.
Introduction
Ozone is a powerful oxidant that has numerous beneficial applications. Ozone has been used as a water treatment to disinfect, eliminate odors, taste, and color, and to remove pesticides, inorganic and organic compounds (Legeron, 1984; Suffet et al., 1986; EPA, 1999). Agricultural applications of ozone include the storage and preservation of vegetables and fruits, the surface decontamination of perishable foods, and the disinfection of manufacturing equipment, water, and packaging materials (Graham, 1997).
We have evaluated the efficacy of ozone to control pests of stored grain. Ozone is attractive because its degradation product is oxygen, thus leaving no undesirable residue, and ozone can be generated on-site, eliminating the need to store or dispose of chemical containers. Previously, we reported 92–100% mortality of adult maize weevils, Sitophilus zeamais (Motschulsky), larvae of Indian meal moth, Plodia interpunctella (Hübner), and adult red flour beetles, Tribolium castaneum (Herbst) in infested maize when fumigated with 50 ppm ozone for 3 d. The same treatment also significantly reduced the viability of Aspergillus parasiticus Speare and other fungi on the kernel surface (Kells et al., 2001).
The highly reactive nature of ozone poses some unique challenges to achieve effective movement of ozone through a grain mass. Two distinct phases of ozone movement in maize have been described (Strait, 1998; Kells et al., 2001). When grain is treated with ozone for the first time (Phase 1), the concentration of ozone is reduced as it moves through the grain because interaction with matter on and around the grain surface rapidly degrades the ozone. Once these reactive sites are eliminated, the ozone moves freely through the maize with little degradation caused by the grain mass. The grain is then considered to be in the Phase 2 state. Our previous study on the flow of ozone through a column of maize indicated that an apparent velocity of 0.03 m/s was optimal for achieving 85% of the ozone concentration from the ozone generator to a 2.7 m depth in 0.8 d during Phase 1. Once Phase 2 was reached, 90% of the ozone concentration was reached in less than 0.5 d with an apparent velocity of 0.02 m/s. These velocities are within the capability of standard aeration fans suggesting that ozonation is achievable in maize storage bins.
In the present study, we addressed two important questions concerning the efficacy of ozonation: (1) What are the flow characteristics of ozone through a less porous grain than maize such as wheat? (2) What effect does long exposure to a high ozone concentration (50 ppm) have on grain quality for end-users of the grain? Previous studies by Strait (1998) indicated that ozone treatment of maize had no detrimental effect on germination. Here we examined the effects of 50 ppm ozone for 30 d on popping volume of popcorn, fatty acid and amino acid composition of soybean, wheat, and maize, milling characteristics of wheat and maize, baking characteristics of wheat, and stickiness of rice.
Section snippets
Penetration of ozone into columns of wheat
Three columns (0.57 m dia.×3 m) previously described by Kells et al. (2001) were filled with 0.75 tonnes of hard winter wheat. As described by Kells et al. (2001), 50 ppm ozone at three apparent air flow velocities (0.02, 0.03 and 0.04 m/s) was delivered from a generator built by Heating Recovery Systems (Carmel, IN). Airflow was measured with a 5.1 cm anemometer DA-4 (Davis Instruments, Hayward, CA) at the transition pipe connecting the ozone generator to the columns. Ozone concentration was
Penetration of ozone into columns of wheat
The objective of an ozonation is to rapidly fill the interstitial spaces in a grain mass with an ozone concentration that effectively kills insects. Efficacy studies have indicated that 50 ppm ozone for 3 d will kill 92–100% of several important stored grain insects (Kells et al., 2001). The time needed to reach the target concentration at a depth of 2.7 m depended on the velocity of the ozone flow and whether the grain mass was in a Phase 1 or Phase 2 state. In this current study, wheat was found
Acknowledgements
We thank David Skillman for technical help with the ozone generator. USDA NRI Competitive Grants Program, award no. 99-35316-8656, provided support for this research. This report constitutes Journal Publication 16636 of the Purdue University Agricultural Research Program.
References (19)
S. Kells et al.
Efficacy and fumigation characteristics of ozone in stored maize
Journal of Stored Products Research
(2001)
AACC, 1995. Approved Methods of the American Association of Cereal Chemists, 9th Edition. American Association of...
AOAC International, 2000. In: Horwitz, W. (Ed.), Official Methods of Analysis of AOAC International. 17th Edition....
R.I. Brooks et al.
Effects of air, ozone, and nitrogen dioxide exposure on the oxidation of corn and soybean lipids
Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry
(1978)
S.R. Eckhoff et al.
A 100-g laboratory corn wet-milling procedure
Cereal Chemistry
(1996)
EPA, United States Environmental Protection Agency, 1999. Alternative disinfectants and oxidants guidance manual,...
D.M. Graham
Use of ozone for food processing
Food Technology
(1997)
B.R. Hamaker et al.
Changing the viscoelastic properties of cooked rice through protein disruption
Cereal Chemistry
(1990)
S. Ibanoglu
Influence of tempering with ozonated water on the selected properties of wheat flour
Journal of Food Engineering
(2000)
There are more references available in the full text version of this article.
Cited by (182)
Fungicidal effect of gaseous ozone in malting barley: Implications for Fusarium infections and grain germination
2024, Journal of Cereal Science
Show abstract
Association between low-temperature drying and ozonation processes to control pests and preserve maize quality
2024, Food Control
Show abstract
Modeling ozone deposition on bulk grains and ozone deposition in columns of wheat grains
2023, Journal of Stored Products Research
Show abstract
Ozone as an alternative fumigant for controlling Callosobruchus maculatus (F.) (Coleoptera: Chrysomelidae) in cowpea beans
2022, Journal of Stored Products Research
Show abstract
Applications of ozonation in the food industry
2022, Non-thermal Food Processing Operations: Unit Operations and Processing Equipment in the Food Industry
Show abstract
Ozone gas treatment against three main pests of stored products by combination of different application parameters
2022, Journal of Stored Products Research
Show abstract
View all citing articles on Scopus
View full text
Copyright © 2002 Elsevier Science Ltd. All rights reserved.
Recommended articles
Efficacy of sensor assisted vacuum hermetic storage against chemical fumigated wheat
Journal of Stored Products Research, Volume 88, 2020, Article 101640
Sunil Kumar, …, Krishna Kumar Singh
Degradation of bifenthrin and pirimiphos-methyl residues in stored wheat grains ( L.) by ozonation
Food Chemistry, Volume 203, 2016, pp. 246-251
Geovana D. Savi, …, Vildes M. Scussel
Saturated aqueous ozone degradation of deoxynivalenol and its application in contaminated grains
Food Control, Volume 69, 2016, pp. 185-190
Chao Sun, …, Xiulan Sun
Show 3 more articles
Article Metrics
Citations
Citation Indexes:
180
Captures
Readers:
90
View details
About ScienceDirect
Remote access
Shopping cart
Advertise
Contact and support
Terms and conditions
Privacy policy
Cookies are used by this site.
Cookie Settings
All content on this site: Copyright © 2024 Elsevier B.V., its licensors, and contributors. All rights are reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. For all open access content, the Creative Commons licensing terms apply.
We use cookies that are necessary to make our site work. We may also use additional cookies to analyze, improve, and personalize our content and your digital experience. For more information, see ourCookie Policy
Cookie Settings
Accept all cookies