Jump to Content
This site uses cookies, tags, and tracking settings to store information that help give you the very best browsing experience.
Dismiss this warning
My Stuff
Sign in
Sign up
Submit
Subscribe
Home
COVID-19
Journals
Publish Before Print
Collections
For Authors
For Librarians
About Us
Search
Characteristics of radiation-induced brain tumors: case series and systematic review
Shumpei Onishi





 MD, PhD, Fumiyuki Yamasaki





 MD, PhD





 MD, PhD





 MBBS, PhD





 MD, PhD





 MD





 MD





 MD





 MD










 MD, PhD





 MD, PhD
View More
Publication Date: 07 Jun 2024
Page Range: 1–9
Volume/Issue: Publish Before Print
DOI link: https://doi.org/10.3171/2024.3.JNS232934
Open access
Download PDF
ABSTRACT
Full Text
PDF
SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIALS
OBJECTIVE
Radiation therapy (RT) improves the outcome of patients with cancer but introduces the risk of radiation-induced neoplasms in cancer survivors. The most common radiation-induced brain tumors (RIBTs) are gliomas (RIGs), meningiomas (RIMs), and sarcomas (RISs). To investigate the characteristics of these RIBTs, the authors conducted a comprehensive review and analysis of their case series and relevant cases from the literature.
METHODS
Sixteen patients in the case series and 941 patients from the literature who previously underwent cranial irradiation were included in this study. The age at irradiation for primary disease was recorded, and the latency period from irradiation to the development of RIBT and the median overall survival (OS) of patients with RIBTs were analyzed using the Kaplan-Meier method. Patients were stratified by age at the time of irradiation (pediatric vs nonpediatric) and the irradiation dose (higher vs lower dose), and latency and OS were compared using the log-rank test.
RESULTS
Among patients with RIBTs, 23.4% underwent radiation at < 5 years of age, and 46.6% underwent RT in the 1st decade of life. The median ages at cranial irradiation were 8.4 (IQR 4.1–16) years in patients with RIMs, 9 (IQR 5–23) years in patients with RIGs, and 27.7 (IQR 13.8–40) years in patients with RISs. The median latency period from irradiation to the development of RIM was significantly longer than that to the development of RIG and RIS (RIM: 20 years, RIG: 9 years, RIS: 10 years; p < 0.0001). The latency period was shorter in the nonpediatric patient group with RIMs (p = 0.047). The OS was significantly longer in patients with RIMs than in those with RIGs and RISs (RIM: not reached, RIG: 11 months, RIS: 11 months; p < 0.0001). The OS of patients with RIMs and RIGs was significantly shorter in patients who received higher radiation doses (p = 0.0095 and p = 0.0026, respectively).
CONCLUSIONS
The prognosis was poor and worse for patients with RIGs and RISs than for those with RIMs, and patients with RIBTs who underwent higher-dose irradiation for primary disease had poor prognoses. Because RIBTs develop more than a decade after cranial irradiation, long-term follow-up is crucial.
ABBREVIATIONS
  COG = Children’s Oncology Group;  IDH = isocitrate dehydrogenase;  OS = overall survival;  RIBT = radiation-induced brain tumor;  RIG = radiation-induced glioma;  RIM = radiation-induced meningioma;  RIS = radiation-induced sarcoma;  RT = radiation therapy.
Save
Cite
Email this content
Collapse
Expand
Publish Before Print
in Journal of Neurosurgery
Search within Journal...
Search
Issue Journal
Publish Before Print
eTOC Alerts
Ahead of Print Alerts
Get Latest Issue TOC RSS
Article Information
Contributor Notes
Correspondence Fumiyuki Yamasaki: Graduate School of Biomedical and Health Sciences, Hiroshima University, Hiroshima, Japan. fyama@hiroshima-u.ac.jp.
INCLUDE WHEN CITING Published online June 7, 2024; DOI: 10.3171/2024.3.JNS232934.
Disclosures The authors report no conflict of interest concerning the materials or methods used in this study or the findings specified in this paper.
Keywords: radiation-induced brain tumor; glioma; meningioma; sarcoma; oncology; tumor
Page Count: 9
Headings
Figures
References
Metrics
PubMed



Google Scholar


© Copyright 1944-2024 American Association of Neurological Surgeons. All rights reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies.
Permissions
Legal
Notices
Feedback
Editorial Boards
CME
For Advertisers
Job Seekers
JNSPG Shop
Facebook
Twitter
Instagram
Powered by PubFactory
Powered by PubFactory