Journals & Books
Help
Search
My account
Sign in
Access through your institution
Purchase PDF
Article preview
Abstract
Introduction
Section snippets
References (62)
Cited by (60)
LWT
Volume 146
, July 2021, 111412
Recent advances in applications of ozone in the cereal industry
Author links open overlay panel
S. Sivaranjani a
,
V. Arun Prasath b
,
R. Pandiselvam c
,
Anjineyulu Kothakota d
,
Amin Mousavi Khaneghah e
Show more
Add to Mendeley
Share
Cite
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.lwt.2021.111412
Get rights and content
Highlights
•
Ozone (O3) is a strong oxidant used for mycotoxin degradation in cereals.
•
O3 enhances dough strength and substitute for chemical bleaching agents in cereal flour.
•
Growing energy was increased in seeds with limited O3 concentration.
Abstract
Ozone is an eco-friendly and cost-effective non-thermal food processing technology utilized in place of thermal treatment. It is also termed green technology as it causes the least adverse effects on the environment. It is widely applied for microbial decontamination and mycotoxin degradation in cereals and enhances seed germination rate. The current article provides an overview of the efficacy of ozone on cereals processing for microbial decontamination, mycotoxin degradation, insect control, starch modification, functional quality changes, and germination ability. Furthermore, the limitations and economic aspects of ozone compared with other thermal and non-thermal techniques are summarized. Future research directions of ozone are briefly discussed. Several factors that influence the ozone treatment process, such as concentration, temperature, pH of the medium, and moisture content, and bed thickness of the grain, are discussed. The oxidation principle involved in ozone treatment ensures that the final product is the microbiologically safe and shelf-stable product. Seed treatment by ozone also enhances the germination ability of seeds. Thus, ozone proves to be a promising technology in maintaining the quality of cereal and cereal-based products.
Graphical abstract
Download: Download high-res image (117KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Introduction
Ozone is a strong oxidant that is found to have various applications in the food industries. Ozone has been applied as gaseous or aqueous forms for decontamination of foodstuffs viz., fruits, vegetables, spices, herbs, beverages, meat, and fish (Pandiselvam, Manikantan, et al., 2019). Ozone treatment improves both the microbiological safety and qualitative shelf life of food products. Further, the ozone application extends to managing storage pests and mycotoxin degradation (Afsah-Hejri, Hajeb, & Ehsani, 2020; Pandiselvam & Thirupathi, 2015; Isikber & Athanassiou, 2015). The advantage of using ozone is that it readily decomposes into oxygen in the air with minimal residues in the product and eliminates the need to remove gas from the product. Since ozone has non-residual properties and is an eco-friendly technique, it is the most promising green technology that could improve food safety and quality (Pandiselvam et al. 2019a, 2020b). Also, it has been listed as "Generally Recognized as Safe" (GRAS) for disinfection of food matrix (Obadi, Zhu, Peng, Sulieman, Mohammed, et al., 2018).
The use of ozone for cereals products is aimed to control the bacteria and fungi growth (Obadi, Zhu, Peng, Sulieman, Mohammed, et al., 2018; White et al., 2013), management of storage pests (Pandiselvam et al., 2015; Pandiselvam, Thirupathi, et al., 2019), and mycotoxin degradation (Afsah-Hejri et al., 2020). In addition to that, the functional properties of the grains can be altered by ozone treatment. Ozonationimproves the dough strength and brightness of wheat flour (Li et al., 2013; Sandhu et al., 2011). For improving the brightness of flour, benzoyl peroxide, calcium peroxide, nitrogen dioxide, and chlorine are commonly used as chemical bleaching agents. The residual levels of chemicals and their reaction product can create safety and environmental hazard. Hence, ozone could be a viable option for enhancing flour whiteness with minimal effects on the environment. Seed treatment using ozone proves to be a germination enhancer in cereals and improves plant growth (Pandiselvam, Mayookha, et al., 2020).
Ozone can be used for improving the quality parameters. Ozone could be applied to inhibit enzymes responsible for color degradation to avoid discoloration of products. Although ozone has more significant applications than other techniques, it is not widely used, which can be correlated with the high cost of ozone generation. The commercial method for ozone generation is corona discharge, which is inefficient because more than 75% of the input energy is converted into heat and light (Nath et al., 2014). However, there are significant advantages that must be noted. It is an economically feasible technology with high reactivity.
This review focuses on the recent ozone applications in cereals industries such as microbial decontamination, mycotoxin degradation, starch modification, stored product insect control, and seed germination enhancement.
Section snippets
Decontamination of microbes and fungus in cereals
Ozone is known to have antimicrobial properties in cereal and cereal products against various microorganisms such as Staphylococcus, Coliform bacteria, Aspergillus, Penicillium, Curvularia, Fusarium, Cladosporium, Mucor, and Rhizopus (De Alencar et al., 2012; El-Desouky et al., 2012; Isikber & Athanassiou, 2015; Latifi et al., 2019; Santos et al., 2016; Savi, Piacentini, & Scussel, 2014; White et al., 2013). Antimicrobial ozone activities depend on the state of ozone (gaseous/aqueous phase),
Effects of ozone on cereal quality
The quality of grain flour determines the quality of the end product. The influence of ozone on the nutritional quality of cereals and the functional properties of ozonated flour is described in Table 5. Studies show that ozone does not influence the protein, ash, sedimentation value, and fat in wheat flour (Li et al., 2015; Mei et al., 2016; Sandhu et al., 2011). The fatty acid value remains the same between treated and untreated wheat samples exposed to 75 mg/L of ozone for 90 min (Wang et
Economical assessments
Ozone proves to be a promising technique over other thermal and non-thermal techniques. Heat disinfestations of barley require around $1.30/t of operational cost. Thermal treatment of grains above 60 °C is required to achieve maximum insect mortality, which affects grain quality. It also demands a rapid cooling unit after heat treatment to reduce the risk of grain damage such as germination (Qaisrani & Beckett, 2003). This, in turn, increases the cost of the thermal treatment system. Ozone
Challenges associated with ozone technology
Ozone finds wide application in various food processing industries. However, certain limitations of ozone treatment in cereal processing require to be addressed. Though ozone treatment is effective, as mentioned above, the prevalence of ozone was minimal compared with other technologies due to the high cost of the ozone treatment system (Brodowska et al., 2018; Pandiselvam, Manikantan, et al., 2019). Ozone at high dosage affects the quality of grains besides having antimicrobial properties.
Conclusions and future research directions
Ozone is proven to have antimicrobial, insecticidal, and mycotoxin degradation effects. Numerous factors influence the ozone treatment, viz., moisture content, humidity, ozone concentration, pH, treatment time, application forms (gaseous/aqueous form), and flow rate. However, only a few factors are taken into consideration in ozone treatment. The standardization of the ozone process with these parameters in consideration needs to be carried out to better understand the effect of factors.
Funding
This research did not receive any specific grant from funding agencies in the public, commercial, or not-for-profit sectors.
Authors Contributions
S. Sivaranjani: Investigation, Data curation, Resources, Supervision, Project administration, Conceptualization, Methodology Writing, original draft. V. Arun Prasath: Investigation, literature searching, writing & editing. R. Pandiselvam: Resources, Supervision, Writing & editing. Anjineyulu Kothakota: Software, Supervision. Amin Mousavi Khaneghah: Supervision, review & editing.
Declaration of competing interest
No potential conflict of interest was reported by the author(s).
References (62)
H. Çatal et al.
Effect of aqueous ozonation on the pasting, flow, and gelatinization properties of wheat starch
LWT-Food Science and Technology
(2014)
H.T. Chan et al.
Molecular structure, rheological and thermal characteristics of ozone-oxidized starch
Food Chemistry
(2011)
R. Chen et al.
Effect of ozone on aflatoxins detoxification and nutritional quality of peanuts
Food Chemistry
(2014)
P. Gozé et al.
Starch characterization after ozone treatment of wheat grains
Journal of Cereal Science
(2016)
L.S. Hansen et al.
Effect of gaseous ozone for control of stored product pests at low and high temperature
Journal of Stored Products Research
(2013)
A.A. Isikber et al.
The use of ozone gas for the control of insects and microorganisms in stored products
Journal of Stored Products Research
(2015)
M. Li et al.
Delineating the microbial and physical-chemical changes during storage of ozone-treated wheat flour
Innovative Food Science & Emerging Technologies
(2013)
M. Li et al.
Evaluation of the quality characteristics of wheat flour and shelf-life of fresh noodles as affected by ozone treatment
Food Chemistry
(2012)
M.S. Lucas et al.
Treatment of winery wastewater by ozone-based advanced oxidation processes (O3, O3/UV and O3/UV/H2O2) in a pilot-scale bubble column reactor and process economics
Separation and Purification Technology
(2010)
X. Luo et al.
Effect of ozone treatment on aflatoxin B1 and safety evaluation of ozonized corn
Food Control
(2014)
View more references
Cited by (60)
Use of ozone oxidation in combination with deacetylation for improving the structure and gelation properties of konjac glucomannan
2024, Food Chemistry
Show abstract
Isolation and evaluation of probiotics from traditional Chinese foods for aflatoxin B<inf>1</inf> detoxification: Geotrichum candidum XG1 (yeast) and mechanistic insights
2024, Food Chemistry
Show abstract
Potential of drying carrot using ozone pre-treatment: Mass transfer modelling and techno-functional properties
2024, Food and Bioproducts Processing
Show abstract
Application of ozone at low-pressure: Control of egg and larval phases of Zabrotes subfasciatus, inactivation of Aspergillus flavus and qualitative changes in bean grains
2024, Food Control
Show abstract
Association between low-temperature drying and ozonation processes to control pests and preserve maize quality
2024, Food Control
Show abstract
Plasma treatment: An alternative and sustainable green approach for decontamination of mycotoxin in dried food products
2023, Journal of Agriculture and Food Research
Show abstract
View all citing articles on Scopus
View full text
© 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
Part of special issue
Emerging Processing Technologies to Improve the Safety and Quality of Foods
Edited by Mohsen Gavahian, Amin Mousavi Khaneghah
View special issue
Recommended articles
Degradation kinetics of pirimiphos-methyl residues in maize grains exposed to ozone gas
Journal of Stored Products Research, Volume 74, 2017, pp. 1-5
Romenique da Silva de Freitas, …, Lucas Henrique Figueiredo Prates
Synthesis and characterization of CuO/ZnO/CNTs thin films on copper substrate and its photocatalytic applications
OpenNano, Volume 4, 2019, Article 100025
D. Saravanakkumar, …, M. Jayachandran
In vitro cytotoxicity effect and antibacterial performance of human lung epithelial cells A549 activity of Zinc oxide doped TiO nanocrystals: Investigation of bio-medical application by chemical method
Materials Science and Engineering: C, Volume 74, 2017, pp. 325-333
K. Kaviyarasu, …, M. Maaza
Show 3 more articles
Article Metrics
Citations
Citation Indexes:
60
Captures
Readers:
102
View details
About ScienceDirect
Remote access
Shopping cart
Advertise
Contact and support
Terms and conditions
Privacy policy
Cookies are used by this site.
Cookie Settings
All content on this site: Copyright © 2024 Elsevier B.V., its licensors, and contributors. All rights are reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. For all open access content, the Creative Commons licensing terms apply.
We use cookies that are necessary to make our site work. We may also use additional cookies to analyze, improve, and personalize our content and your digital experience. For more information, see ourCookie Policy
Cookie Settings
Accept all cookies