Your privacy, your choice
We use essential cookies to make sure the site can function. We, and our 209 partners, also use optional cookies and similar technologies for advertising, personalisation of content, usage analysis, and social media.
By accepting optional cookies, you consent to allowing us and our partners to store and access personal data on your device, such as browsing behaviour and unique identifiers. Some third parties are outside of the European Economic Area, with varying standards of data protection. See our privacy policy for more information on the use of your personal data. Your consent choices apply to nature.com and applicable subdomains.
You can find further information, and change your preferences via 'Manage preferences'.
You can also change your preferences or withdraw consent at any time via 'Your privacy choices', found in the footer of every page.
We use cookies and similar technologies for the following purposes:
Store and/or access information on a device
Personalised advertising and content, advertising and content measurement, audience research and services development
Accept all cookies
Reject optional cookies
Manage preferences
Skip to main content
Advertisement
View all journals
Search
Log in
Explore content
About the journal
Publish with us
Sign up for alerts
RSS feed
nature nature communications articles article
Article
Open access
Published: 11 July 2024
Air pollution disproportionately impairs beneficial invertebrates: a meta-analysis
James M. W. Ryalls
, Jacob Bishop
, Adedayo O. Mofikoya, Lisa M. Bromfield, Shinichi Nakagawa
& Robbie D. Girling
  Nature Communications
 15, Article number: 5447 (2024) Cite this article
1425 Accesses
127 Altmetric
Metrics
Abstract
Air pollution has the potential to disrupt ecologically- and economically-beneficial services provided by invertebrates, including pollination and natural pest regulation. To effectively predict and mitigate this disruption requires an understanding of how the impacts of air pollution vary between invertebrate groups. Here we conduct a global meta-analysis of 120 publications comparing the performance of different invertebrate functional groups in unpolluted and polluted atmospheres. We focus on the pollutants ozone, nitrogen oxides, sulfur dioxide and particulate matter. We show that beneficial invertebrate performance is reduced by air pollution, whereas the performance of plant pest invertebrates is not significantly affected. Ozone pollution has the most detrimental impacts, and these occur at concentrations below national and international air quality standards. Changes in invertebrate performance are not dependent on air pollutant concentrations, indicating that even low levels of pollution are damaging. Predicted increases in tropospheric ozone could result in unintended consequences to global invertebrate populations and their valuable ecological services.
Similar content being viewed by others
Global meta-analysis reveals overall higher nocturnal than diurnal activity in insect communities
Article Open access
15 April 2024
A meta-analysis on decomposition quantifies afterlife effects of plant diversity as a global change driver
Article Open access
11 September 2020
Global synthesis of effects of plant species diversity on trophic groups and interactions
Article 04 May 2020
Introduction
Many of the essential ecosystem services that nature provides, including nutrient cycling, pest control, pollination, and the maintenance of soil structure and fertility, are reliant on the actions of invertebrate species1. However, globally, invertebrate populations are fundamentally threatened by a range of human activities including land use change, the introduction of alien invasive species, and air pollution2. Common air pollutants, derived from anthropogenic origins, can cause significant reductions in invertebrate fitness3,4,5,6,7. Air pollutants can have direct impacts by inducing changes at physiological and molecular levels8,9,10,11. They can also have indirect impacts by inducing changes to the nutritional status of host plants, or by disrupting odor-mediated navigation and communication7,12,13,14,15 through chemical reactions that modify odor cues and signaling compounds (volatile organic compounds [VOCs]). To-date, research on the impacts of air pollution on invertebrates has focused on either individual species or the interactions between two species in controlled laboratory or field studies, with little understanding of wider landscape-scale impacts. While previous meta-analyses have synthesized the effects of a number of air pollutants on invertebrates3,16,17,18,19,20,21, no studies have identified how we could effectively predict the broad impacts of air pollution across invertebrate communities. Relative to other factors contributing to the decline of invertebrate populations, this knowledge gap highlights a significant lack of understanding about the extent and consistency of air pollution impacts across all invertebrate groups. This means that it is not yet possible to estimate the potential impacts of air pollution on insect-provisioned ecosystem services and disservices.
Air pollutants that are elevated as a result of anthropogenic activity, including ozone (O3), sulfur dioxide (SO2), nitrogen oxides (NOx, comprising nitric oxide [NO] and nitrogen dioxide [NO2]) and respirable suspended particulate matter (PM), can all alter the abundance, health, and distribution of invertebrates3,4,5,6,7,21,22. Concentrations of tropospheric O3, produced in photochemical reactions between NOx and VOCs23, have more than doubled from pre-industrial times and the frequency of high-O3 episodes is projected to increase in the coming decades24,25. Nitrogen oxides are emitted predominantly by combustion engine vehicles and, despite legislation and a transition towards electric vehicles, will continue to be an important air pollutant due to the long average lifespans of combustion engine vehicles (>20 years)26. SO2 is primarily released from the burning of fossil fuels, especially coal, for energy generation and domestic heating27. Complex reactions of chemicals, including SO2 and NOx, form fine particles respirable by humans, or PM, which are most prevalent in industrial, urban, and high-traffic areas28. Elevated levels of PM have also been linked to an increase in wildfires as a result of human-induced climate change, with significant repercussions for rural areas29. Studies have investigated the effects of each of these pollutants on the performance of a range of invertebrate species (Supplementary Data 1), but without comparisons of impacts between groups, it is difficult to predict which are most at risk.
Here, we conduct a multi-level meta-analysis to identify simple and generalizable ways to understand the variation in how invertebrate performance responds to air pollution. Understanding what can be generalized is essential because knowledge of the diversity of responses of invertebrate groups to air pollutants globally remains limited. Functional trait-based approaches (i.e. identifying characteristics shared between species) facilitate holistic predictions into how invertebrate communities respond to environmental change, but they are underutilized in general, especially in the context of air pollution30,31,32. We quantify the effects of air pollution on invertebrate performance (with respect to individual species, populations, and communities of invertebrates), defined broadly as invertebrate abundance, feeding efficiency, growth/development, survival, searching efficiency, diversity, and reproduction, by calculating the ratio of invertebrate performance in control conditions and in elevated pollutant conditions. This allows us to combine the results of experimental studies across 120 publications (Supplementary Data 1, Supplementary Fig. 1), four air pollutants, over forty invertebrate families, and a total of 877 effect sizes across 19 countries (Fig. 1). We compare the extent to which different predictors explain variation in the effects of air pollution on invertebrate performance; these predictors include different levels of invertebrate taxonomic classification, different ways of measuring their functional characteristics, and the plant species that the invertebrates were interacting with in each experimental study (Tables 1 and 2, Supplementary Note 3). For example, the category ‘pest status’ comprises of beneficial invertebrates (i.e. those providing ecological and economic benefits to humans in the form of decomposition, pollination, and pest control services), significant pest invertebrates (i.e. those appearing in at least one of three global databases of economically important plant pests) and other herbivores (i.e. those not included in these databases and not considered economically beneficial). See the “Methods” section for full details on classifications. We focus on invertebrate responses to individual air pollutants because interactions between pollutants are complex, and only a handful of empirical studies13,15,32,33,34,35,36 exist on invertebrate responses to mixtures of pollutants. We also explore whether the effects of air pollutants on invertebrate performance vary with pollutant concentration, to understand the potential role of mitigation strategies. This study offers insights into the complex interactions between air pollution and different invertebrate groups, the results of which can inform future policies to regulate air pollution and the development of management plans to mitigate the effects on those most vulnerable invertebrate groups. We show that beneficial invertebrates, such as pollinators and natural pest regulators, which are essential for food security, are adversely affected by air pollution. Conversely, air pollution has no impact on herbivore pest invertebrates. Of the four pollutants, tropospheric ozone has the most detrimental effect on beneficial invertebrates, impairing their performance even at low concentrations.
Fig. 1: Geographical distribution of studies included in the meta-analysis.
For each included country (highlighted green), the total number of publications (circled) is shown. Map and centroids (points) for each country used the Natural Earth data set with the R package ‘maps’. The treemaps (produced by the R package ‘treemap’) shown for each country are scaled by the total number of effect sizes and indicate the proportion of effect sizes per pollutant.
Full size image
Table 1 Summary of predictors (moderators) of responses of invertebrate performance to elevated concentrations of air pollution (i.e. overall effects of all four air pollutants: Ozone, nitrogen oxides, sulfur dioxide and particulate matter)
Full size table
Table 2 Summary of predictors (moderators) of responses of invertebrate performance to elevated concentrations of four individual air pollutants: Ozone (O3), nitrogen oxides (NOx), sulfur dioxide (SO2), and particulate matter (PM)
Full size table
Results
Effects of air pollution on invertebrates
Elevated concentrations of air pollution (i.e. all pollutants considered together) reduced the performance of beneficial invertebrates by 31.3% compared with control conditions (confidence interval (CI) = 22.2–39.3%, P < 0.001) while, in contrast, the performance of significant pest invertebrates (CI = −8.3% to 8.4%, P = 0.924) and other herbivores (CI = −6.7% to 14.0%, P = 0.435) was unaffected by air pollution (Fig. 2A).
Fig. 2: The effects of air pollution on pest and beneficial invertebrate performance.
Orchard plots of meta-analytic mean effect sizes (ln RR; log response ratio) for each of three levels of invertebrate pest status. White points represent meta-analytic means and black rectangles represent the 95% confidence intervals from a model across all pollutants (A) or individual pollutants (B–E; ozone (O3), nitrogen oxides (NOx), sulfur dioxide (SO2) and particulate matter (PM), respectively). Points to the left of zero indicate negative impacts and points to the right indicate positive impacts. 95% confidence intervals overlapping the zero line indicate the mean estimate is not significantly different from zero (P < 0.05). Significant effects of O3, NOx, and SO2 are indicated by ***P < 0.0001, **P = 0.004 and *P = 0.046, respectively. Number of effect sizes for significant pests, other herbivores, and beneficial invertebrates (top to bottom): All (415, 282, 166), O3 (302, 95, 74), NOx (26, 36, 27), SO2 (80, 111, 54), PM (7, 40, 11). Source data are provided as a Source Data file.
Full size image
Detritivores, pollinators, and parasitoids were all negatively affected (21–39% reductions in performance) while all herbivorous guilds were either unaffected or responded positively to air pollution (Fig. 3A). These relatively simple predictors (i.e. pest status and feeding guild; see methods and Supplementary Note 3 for detailed classifications) explained 10% and 15% of variation in the response of invertebrates to elevated concentrations of air pollution across the different pollutants tested (marginal R2 see ref. 37; Table 1). Searching efficiency was the most negatively affected aspect of invertebrate performance across all pollutants and was reduced by a third on average when invertebrates were exposed to elevated air pollution treatments (CI = 20–44% reduction, P < 0.001; Supplementary Fig. 2A). The diversity of invertebrates was also significantly reduced across all pollutants (P = 0.024).
Fig. 3: The effects of air pollution on the performance of invertebrates from different feeding guilds.
Orchard plots of meta-analytic mean effect sizes (lnRR; log response ratio) for up to seven invertebrate feeding guilds. Model estimates for each feeding guild calculated from less than three studies were not included. White points represent meta-analytic means and black rectangles represent the 95% confidence intervals from a model across all pollutants (A) or individual pollutants (B–E; ozone (O3), nitrogen oxides (NOx), sulfur dioxide (SO2) and particulate matter (PM), respectively). Points to the left of zero indicate negative impacts and points to the right indicate positive impacts. 95% confidence intervals overlapping the zero line indicate the mean estimate is not significantly different from zero (P < 0.05). Number of effect sizes from top to bottom: All (10, 47, 80, 24, 428, 210, 22), O3 (5, 18, 34, 7, 263, 111, 15), NOx (12, 14, 12, 31), SO2 (4, 17, 25, 108, 68), PM (7, 45). Source data are provided as a Source Data file.
Full size image
Effects of individual pollutants
The