(1 of 8)
Automatic Zoom
Actual Size
Page Fit
Page Width
0%
50%
75%
100%
125%
150%
200%
300%
400%
Current Research in Nutrition and Food Science
 Vol.
 4
(2),
 127-134 (2016)

Cake Flour Chlorination and Alternative

Treatments (Review)

H
A
nee M. Al-D
M
oo
R
 and
 J
AFAR
 M.
 e
l-Qu
DAH

Al-Balqa Applied University, Faculty of Technological Agriculture, Department of

Nutrition and Food Processing, Al-Salt, Jordan.

http://dx.doi.org/10.12944/CRNFSJ.4.2.06

(
Received: May 19, 2016; Accepted: June 15, 2016)

Abs
TRACT

In order to produce satisfactory cake, ingredients must be balanced accurately. Flour acts as

building structure that contributes in the crumb properties. Chlorine treatment of soft wheat flour has

been widely used since the 1920s. The functional effect of chlorination is partially de-polymerizing

and oxidizing of flour starch. Oxidized starch granules are able to swell more rapidly after the starch

reaches the gelatinization temperature and the resulting batter system will be adequately viscous to

support the cake’s structure without collapsing. Batter expansion is superior for treated flours, even

at the lowest chlorination rate, than for untreated flour. Alternatives to chlorine treatment need to

be developed because of the potential carcinogenic effect of chlorination. Egg albumin contributes

strength to cake crumb and improves cake volume. Acceptable cake volume can be achieved by

heating but the dryer, stiffer crumb that springs back upon compression is not produced by heated

flours. Xanthan gum L-cysteine, and hydrogen peroxide plus peroxidase to heat-treated flour and

obtained volumes equivalent to cakes produced using chlorine-treated flour.
 Ozone treatments also

are applied in cake flour with some benefits instead of chlorination.

Keywords
: Cake, Flour, Chlorination, Alternative, Treatment, Ingredients.

In
TR
o
D
u
CTI
on

Cake quality is governed by three major

factors: the suitability of the individual ingredients

for the specific type of cake being made, a properly

balanced formula, and the optimum mixing and

baking procedures
2
. Cake flour was well-defined, low

ash and low protein content produced for best cake

bake performance by milling of soft wheat grains

that highly refined flour which is extracted from the

centre of the kernel of wheat
13
. Soft wheat flours are

usually low water absorption which doesn’t need

severe mixing batter for resulting products possess

qualities such as tenderness, softness, crispness

and good texture
13
. It is well-known the general

specifications for typical for cake flour include;

moisture at 13.50±0.5%, protein at 8.00±0.5%,

ash content of 0.35±0.05%. The best cakes are

produced from low protein flour (7-9%), clean which

is close as possible to being pure endosperm, with

small particle size and little starch damage, which

will blend easily to give a smooth cake batter and

tender cakes
5,13
.
 Hard wheat flour has strong and

higher protein content, generally used in the making

of yeast leavened bakery products such as bread,

while the soft flour has weak protein which is found

suitable for the making of cookies, cakes, biscuits

and crackers. Weak flour don’t form steady gluten

network when flour is mixed with water due to slighter

amount and basic quality characteristics of gluten

proteins in weak flour
2
. The important conditions

of soft wheat dough products include low levels of

water and add larger amounts of sugar and fat in

low-power mode inputs to support the preparation of

the dough is crumbly and extended, but be deficient

in the strength and elasticity
35
.
128
 A
L
-D
MOOR
 &
 E
L
-Qu
DAH
 Curr. Res. Nutr Food Sci Jour.,
 Vol.
 4
(2), 127-134 (2016)

Gluten gives the structure in baked

products, higher quantity of gluten proteins is

inappropriate for cake production because large

quantity of gluten proteins put off spread of dough

and when handling of dough to specific size and

shape of such product
2
.
 The larger quantity of gluten

proteins formulate the dough physically powerful and

more elastic that contracts or shrinks back after leaf

formation.
 The glutenin proteins are held responsible

for the strength and elastic nature of dough. Gluten

network and interactions support gas retention

and improve the dimensions of bakery products.

Gliadin is globular protein in nature and recognized

with less surface areas for interaction with other

flour components which is an explanation the more

extensible construct of the dough proteins
34,35
. The

quality cakes also have been affected via starch

properties in flour. Starch gelatinization function

during baking considers an important factor for

producing interior texture and the crust color

formation of cakes. Increasing of the amount of

starch wheat flour develops the demotions and

spread ability of cake products. This outcome may

be due to the dilution effects of gluten by expanding

the amount of starch in the dough. More dilutions

of gluten results better the extensibility and spread

ability of dough during handing and baking
27
. Starch

granules have been physically broken throughout

the milling. The percentage of damaged is different

between flours which milled from hard, soft and

durum wheat varieties. For example milling of a hard

wheat need more energy and thus harshness of

breaking up results in higher percentage of damaged

starch in hard wheat flours while lesser energy is

needed to break soft wheat grains for preferred

particle size flour and hence the soft wheat flour

normally has slighter percentage of damaged starch.

Consequently, the proportion of damaged starch in

flour is an importance factor in some of rheological

and final quality of baking products
34,27
. A high quality

cake is supposed to have high volume with a fine

homogeneous moist crumb and texture. Starch

gelatinization, protein denatutration simultaneously

with carbon dioxide formation gives cake it’s porous,

uniformity fine and soft structure. The degree of

spreading out is dependent on the viscosity of the

cake batter. If the cake batter is viscose, it would be

not easy for the air bubbles to run off, which would

produce a high volume cake
25
.

Chlorine treatment of soft wheat flour has

been commonly used since the 1920s. The flour

bleached with chlorine at a pH level of 4.4 - 4.8.

Chlorination of flour improved crumb color and

lowers the gelatinization temperature of the starch

within the flour
24
. Chlorination used to set cake faster

and therefore reduces the loss of leavening during

baking. Bleaching treatments also give the flour the

ability to clasp more sugar and shortening lipids as

well as water that influence in properties of the end

products
23
. For this reason flour bleaching treatments

used in high ratio cakes. Chlorine treatment of cake

flour is functionally advantageous to the making of

high-ratio (more sugar than flour, weight basis) cakes.

The production of baked products using untreated

wheat flour assumes increased importance as the

cereals manufacturing becomes more universally as

well as the safety awareness of chemically treated

foodstuffs are subjected to increase in the controlling

and inspection
4
.

Chlorine treatment functions

T h e
 m e c h a n i s m
 o f
 C h l o r i n a t i o n

enhancements and the effects of chlorine on flour

components have been discussed and studied of

many investigations. Fractionation and reconstitution

studies recommend that the starch fraction is

mainly in charge for the valuable effect of flour

chlorination. Chlorination is usually used on those

soft wheat flours that are proposed for cake making

in order to produce better cakes which affect all

flour constituents, including starch, proteins, lipids

and pentosans. Chlorination is enhancing starch

pasting, increasing hydrophobicity of starch granule

surface protein, decreasing gluten protein strength,

and increasing water-holding capacity
24
.

Chlorine treatments of flour intensify the

increase the amount of sugar and liquid levels to

make the so-called high-ratio cake.
 The significance

advantage or profit of the high-ratio cake recipe

is that product moisture levels can be increased

without adversely impact in the mould-free during

the shelf-life of the product.
 The higher moisture level

enhances a more soft or fine texture and tender and

mouth feeling eating quality to the final products
24
.

Actions of Chlorine on
 s
tarch

Around 25% of chlorine reacts with the

starch granules and this is the main developing effect