ACS ACS Publications C&EN CAS
Find my institution Log In
My Activity
Publications
RETURN TO ISSUEFEATURED ARTICLENEXT
Atmospheric Intermediates at the Air–Water Interface
Shinichi Enami*
, Naoki Numadate
, and Tetsuya Hama
Cite this: J. Phys. Chem. A 2024, 128, 28, 5419–5434
Publication Date:July 5, 2024
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jpca.4c02889
Copyright © 2024 The Authors. Published by American Chemical Society. This publication is licensed under
CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0.
Article Views
503
Altmetric
3
Citations
-
LEARN ABOUT THESE METRICS
Share
Add to
Export
RIS
PDF (5 MB)
SUBJECTS:Interfaces,Lasers,Liquids,Molecules,Photodissociation
Abstract
The air–water interface (AWI) is a ubiquitous reaction field different from the bulk phase where unexpected reactions and physical processes often occur. The AWI is a region where air contacts cloud droplets, aerosol particles, the ocean surface, and biological surfaces such as fluids that line human epithelia. In Earth’s atmosphere, short-lived intermediates are expected to be generated at the AWI during multiphase reactions. Recent experimental developments have enabled the direct detection of atmospherically relevant, short-lived intermediates at the AWI. For example, spray ionization mass spectrometric analysis of water microjets exposed to a gaseous mixture of ozone and water vapor combined with a 266 nm laser flash photolysis system (LFP-SIMS) has been used to directly probe organic peroxyl radicals (RO2·) produced by interfacial hydroxyl radicals (OH·) + organic compound reactions. OH· emitted immediately after the laser flash photolysis of carboxylic acid at the gas–liquid interface have been directly detected by time-resolved, laser-induced florescence techniques that can be used to study atmospheric multiphase photoreactions. In this Featured Article, we show some recent experimental advances in the detection of atmospherically important intermediates at the AWI and the associated reaction mechanisms. We also discuss current challenges and future prospects for atmospheric multiphase chemistry.
This publication is licensed under
CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0.
1. Introduction
ARTICLE SECTIONSJump To
Earth’s atmosphere is composed of gas, liquid, and solid phases and their interfaces. (1) The interfaces are sometimes regarded as a fourth phase that can be distinguished from the other phases by its inhomogeneous nature. The air–water interface (AWI), arguably the most common interface, is a widespread reaction field in the atmosphere where unique reactions and physical processes often occur. (2) The AWI includes regions where air is in contact with cloud droplets, aerosol particles, the surface of the ocean, biological surfaces such as the wet film on a plant, human skin, and epithelial-lining fluids (ELFs). The following are among the key distinguishing features of AWIs. They are associated with a sharp decrease of water density from 1 g cm–3 to zero within just a few angstrom, and the dielectric constant, hydrogen-bonding network, ion distribution, and the associated properties dramatically change as a function of depth. (2) The fact that a “pure” AWI is negatively charged has been known for a century. (3−6) Although the cause of the negative charge is still in debate, (7−9) it is generally accepted that the accumulation of OH– at the AWI if the bulk pH exceeds ∼4 leads to the negative charge. (10,11) Experiments have shown that adding salt to water changes the distribution of both OH– and H+ at the AWI. (10) It has been demonstrated that (H3O+)(H2O)≤4 is available to the topmost layers of the AWI if the bulk pH is less than ∼4, (10,12) and this species acts as a superacid. (13) Because some ions at the AWI are less hydrated or distortedly hydrated, (13,14) there is a huge acceleration of reaction rates compared with the bulk liquid phase, e.g., Fe2+ + H2O2. (15) Because the average hydration number for a water molecule at the AWI is 2.7 (cf., 3.9 in the bulk solution), some chemical species are preferentially adsorbed therein. (16,17)
In the atmosphere, a variety of intermediates are expected to be generated at the AWI during multiphase reactions. Multiphase processes can alter the composition of gas-phase species and contribute to the aging of atmospheric condensed phases, thereby change a variety of properties (hydrophilicity, size, phase, etc.) that impact the radiation balance of Earth. The aging process that occurs at the AWI can also change the oxidation–reduction potential and toxicity of aerosol particles. The uptake of gaseous hydroxyl radicals (OH·), an atmospheric detergent, on the AWI of atmospheric condensed phases such as cloud droplets/aerosols would cause a rapid oxidation of surface-active organic compounds therein. An OH· can abstract a hydrogen (H) atom from an alkyl group or add to a carbon–carbon double bond (C═C). Both reaction pathways yield peroxyl radical (RO2·) intermediates under the high-O2 conditions in Earth’s atmosphere. (18) The RO2· undergo further reactions that lead to the production of closed-shell products, some of which are emitted to the gas phase or diffuse into the bulk phase. It is worth mentioning that the self-reaction and cross-reaction of RO2· (i.e., RO2· + RO2·, RO2· + R′O2·) are generally much faster in the aqueous phase and at the AWI than in the gas phase because of the stabilization of ROOOOR(R′)* by solvent. (19,20) The rate constants are often on the order of 109 M–1 s–1 in the aqueous phase. (19) The OH· can also react with reactive thiol/thiolate groups in bioaerosol particles, which are mixtures of diverse molecules originating from living systems, to form short-lived, S-containing intermediates. (21) Some biological molecules such as glutathione (GSH) can trap OH· and “steer” it to react with the thiol/thiolate group without causing H-abstraction from other moieties (e.g., alkyl groups). (22) Such a “radical recognition process” could occur at the AWI of bioaerosols and ELFs.
Recent experimental, theoretical, and modeling studies have greatly advanced our knowledge of atmospheric intermediates at the AWI and the related chemistry. (2,23,24) In this Featured Article, we report experimental results derived from a spray ionization mass spectrometric study of liquid microjets exposed to reactive gases combined with a 266 nm laser flash photolysis system (LFP-SIMS). (20) We were able to use LFP-SIMS to directly probe atmospherically relevant, short-lived intermediates, including radicals. We focused on the detection of atmospherically important radicals (RO2·, OH·, and Criegee intermediates) and closed-shell sulfenic acid at the AWI. Although other intermediates, including oxo-ferryl [FeIV═O], (15) I2–/IBr– radical anions, (25) and carbocations, (26) were also detected at the AWI by mass spectrometry, we do not discuss those intermediates here. We also report a recently developed technique that combines LFP and laser-induced fluorescence (LIF) for analysis of multiphase photoreactions (m-LFP-LIF). (27) This method enabled us to successfully detect the OH· emitted to the gas phase during the photolysis of a liquid, nonanoic acid at the gas–liquid interface. Both new methods hold promise for elucidating the detailed mechanisms of atmospheric multiphase reactions.
2. Experimental Section
ARTICLE SECTIONSJump To
2.1. Laser Flash Photolysis + Spray Ionization Mass Spectrometry (LFP-SIMS)
The experiments involved the injection of water microjets containing 10–5 to 10–1 M organic reactant into the spraying chamber of a mass spectrometer at atmospheric pressure and ambient temperature (Figure 1A). Water microjets, a mixture of cylindrical jets and microdroplets, were exposed to nearly orthogonal gas-phase OH· beams generated by 266 nm photolysis of a gaseous mixture of O3/O2/H2O/N2 for the study of oxidations of organic molecules initiated by OH· at the AWI. (20) The species produced on the surface of the microjets were analyzed in situ via an online quadrupole mass spectrometer (Agilent 6130 Quadrupole LC/MS Electrospray System, mass range m/z ≥ 50). Using this technique (laser flash photolysis + spray ionization mass spectrometry, LFP-SIMS), we monitored the prompt (within the ∼10-μs lifetime of the intact microjets) formation of anionic products at the AWI of the microjets from the reaction of gaseous OH· with the aqueous reactant. (20) Aqueous solutions containing organic reactant were pumped (100 μL min–1) into the spraying chamber of the mass spectrometer through a grounded stainless steel needle (100-μm bore) coaxial with a sheath (internal diameter n = 200 μm, external diameter = 300 μm) that issued nebulizer N2(g) at a high gas velocity (vg ∼ 160 m s–1). (28) A key feature of the instrument was that the microjets that issued from the nozzle source were orthogonal to the polarized inlet to the mass spectrometer. In such a configuration, a large part of the core components of the microdroplets went to sink, while surface-active ions that were selectively emitted from submicron droplets that originated from the AWI of the initial microdroplets to the gas phase by rapid evaporation of the water solvent were collected by applying an electric bias to the inlet of mass spectrometer (see below). Reaction intermediates/products were detected without any manipulation by mass spectrometry in less than 1 ms.
Figure 1
Figure 1. A) Schematic diagrams of LFP-SIMS and B) the bag-breakup mechanism of droplet. This experimental method allows for the in situ monitoring of reactions of OH· with a sample reactant on the surface of aqueous microdroplets. Adapted with permission from refs (20) and (29). Copyright 2014/2016 American Chemical Society.
The surface specificity of the present method has been demonstrated in several experiments. (10,12,15,28,30,31) For example, the mass spectral signal intensities obtained from equimolar mixtures of solutions of carboxylic acids Rn-COOH (n = 1–7) have been found to increase as a function of n (i.e., hydrophobicity). (29) Because all Rn-COOH (n = 1–7) have similar pKa values of 4.8 ± 0.1, the observed tendency is attributable to the relative ion populations at the AWI. In addition, the mass spectral signal intensity of iodide I– detected at m/z = 127 has been found to be 3.04 ± 0.24 times that of bromide Br– at m/z = 79 and 81 from equimolar aqueous solutions of NaI and NaBr. (31) The mass spectral signal intensity has been found to follow the order ClO4– > I– > Br– ∼ NO3–, (31) in excellent agreement with the order of ion affinity at the AWI determined by other interface-sensitive techniques such as sum frequency generation spectroscopy (SFG), X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS), and theoretical calculations. (32−34) Notably, the relative signal intensity of I– among that of total anions from an equimolar mixture of NaI + NaBr (i.e., S(I–)/ [S(I–) + S(Br–)]) increased as a function of the nebulizer N2 gas velocity (vg) and, as expected, extrapolated to 1 as vg → ∞ because only I– was detected at the topmost layers of the AWI. (28) In contrast, the fact that it extrapolated to 0.5 as vg → 0 indicated that the bulk solution contained equimolar amounts of I– and Br–. (28) This result is explained by the well-known bag-breakup mechanism associated with a liquid film whose thickness and composition are controlled aerodynamically by gas flow (Figure 1B). (6,28−30) In our experimental configuration, after a short (≤10 μs) period of exposure to OH·(g), the microdroplets (>10 μm) were transformed into a film and rims, in which surface-active and nonsurface-active species accumulated, respectively. The film decomposed into submicron droplets, whereas the rims remained as large droplets. Ions were emitted from the submicron droplets to the gas phase by evaporation of water and were detected by a quadrupole mass spectrometer. The mass spectra therefore reflected the compositions of the ions present at the AWI of the initial microjets. (28−30,35)
The 266 nm pulse beam shot by the Nd3+:YAG laser setup was used to generate OH·(g) in situ (Figure 1). (20,36−38) The photodissociation of O3(g) by 266 nm photons produced O(1D), followed by the reaction with H2O(g) within ∼6 ns (rate constant k = 2.2 × 10–10 cm3 molecule–1 s–1), in competition with its deactivation by N2(g)/O2(g) into O(3P). [OH·(g)]0 values were evaluated from the number of photons per unit area, [O3(g)], and gas-phase kinetics. (20) [OH·] at the surface of microjets would be lower than the [OH(g)]0 estimated at the laser photolysis spot because of partial losses via gas-phase OH· recombination into nonreactive H2O2. Thus, [OH·(g)]0 values were regarded as the upper limits to [OH·] on the surface of microjets. Kinetic analysis showed that the reaction of gaseous O(1D) with reactant (aq) was too slow to compete with the gas-phase reaction with water vapor under the experimental conditions. (20) Also, O(3P) was converted mainly into O3 by reaction with excess O2(g). We confirmed that depletion of the reactant signal and formation of the product signal required both the participation of 266 nm photons and O3(g). Therefore, no photolysis occurred on/in water microjets of dissolved reactants. Because the microjets broke up within 10–5 s after being ejected from the