Product & Services
Subscribe
Submit a paper
Browse
Rankings
Blog↗
Contact
Create account
Sign in
  This is a preprint article, it offers immediate access but has not been peer reviewed.
Download This Paper
Open PDF in Browser
Add Paper to My Library
Share:
Fabrication of Mof-Carbonized Materials as Ozone Catalysts for Water Purification: Exploration of Catalytic Mechanisms
35 Pages Posted: 12 Jul 2024
Hongying Meng
Tianjin Chengjian University
Chang Jing
Tianjin Chengjian University
Shaopo Wang
Tianjin Chengjian University
Li Chen
affiliation not provided to SSRN
Wang Zhe
Tianjin University of Technology
Abstract
Due to their stability, the advent of MOF-derived catalysts ensures the application of MOF-based materials, and they have been used in many catalytic systems. However, their application in ozone catalysis is limited, and the relevant mechanism remains unclear. In this study, three MOF-carbonized materials (Me-MOF-C, Me: Fe, Cu, and Zn) were synthesized as ozone catalysts for water purification. When combined with ozone, all the Me-MOF-C synthesized promoted target removal compared with the Me-MOF/O3 systems, and Fe-MOF-C was optimal due to its superior ozone utilization efficiency. ROS quantification indicated that the •OH in the Fe-MOF-C/O3 system was approximately 48.0 times that of single ozone system. Kinetic analysis demonstrated that over 90% of the target was removed by •OH in the Fe-MOF-C/O3 system. Then, the catalytic mechanism of Fe-MOF-C was investigated. The surface hydroxyl and protonation effect of Fe-MOF-C presented limited activity. In comparison, H2O2 in the solution and Fe2+ on the Fe-MOF-C surface were more crucial. AcOH control experiments revealed the positive correlation between •OH and H2O2. H2O2 decomposition experiments further indicated that although the Fe-MOF-C/O3 system utilized H2O2 faster, only the coexistence of ozone and Fe-MOF-C could facilitate it more. Results of Fe2+ regulation suggested that it was related to the way of surface Fe2+ acted. The main contribution of Fe2+ to producing •OH was not through Fe2+ ozonation or reaction with H2O2, but it likely involved the efficient conversion of H2O2 into HO2ˉ, which subsequently decomposed ozone to produce •OH more efficiently. Finally, a possible catalytic pathway was proposed.
Keywords: Catalytic ozonation, MOF-derived material, Catalytic mechanism, Hydroxyl radical, Carbonization
Suggested Citation:
Meng, Hongying and Jing, Chang and Wang, Shaopo and Chen, Li and Zhe, Wang, Fabrication of Mof-Carbonized Materials as Ozone Catalysts for Water Purification: Exploration of Catalytic Mechanisms. Available at SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4893235 or http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.4893235







Download This Paper
Open PDF in Browser
59 References
C Gadipelly , A Pérez-González , G D Yadav , I Ortiz , R Ibáñez , V K Rathod , K V Marathe
Pharmaceutical Industry Wastewater: Review of the Technologies for Water Treatment and Reuse
Ind. Eng. Chem. Res , volume 53 , p. 11571 - 11592 Posted: 2014
U Von Gunten
Oxidation Processes in Water Treatment: Are We on Track?
Environ. Sci. Technol , volume 52 , p. 5062 - 5075 Posted: 2018
J L Wang , H Chen
Catalytic ozonation for water and wastewater treatment: Recent advances and perspective
Sci. Total Environ , volume 704 Posted: 2020
H Mohebali , G Moussavi , M Karimi , S Giannakis
Catalytic ozonation of Acetaminophen with a magnetic, Cerium-based Metal-Organic framework as a novel, easily-separable nanocomposite
Chem. Eng. J , volume 434 Posted: 2022
Load more
0 Citations
Do you have a job opening that you would like to promote on SSRN?
Place Job Opening
Paper statistics
DOWNLOADS
1
ABSTRACT VIEWS
17
59 References
PlumX Metrics
Feedback
Submit a Paper
Section 508 Text Only Pages
SSRN Quick Links
SSRN Solutions
Research Paper Series
Conference Papers
Partners in Publishing
Jobs & Announcements
Special Topic Hubs
SSRN Rankings
Top Papers
Top Authors
Top Organizations
About SSRN
Network Directors
Announcements
Contact us
FAQs
Copyright Terms and Conditions Privacy Policy
All content on this site: Copyright © 2023 Elsevier Inc., its licensors, and contributors. All rights are reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. For all open access content, the Creative Commons licensing terms apply.
We use cookies to help provide and enhance our service and tailor content.
To learn more, visit Cookie Settings.
We use cookies that are necessary to make our site work. We may also use additional cookies to analyze, improve, and personalize our content and your digital experience. For more information, see ourCookie Policy
Cookie Settings
Accept all cookies