We value your privacy
We and our
partners
store and/or access information on a device, such as cookies and process personal data, such as unique identifiers and standard information sent by a device for personalised advertising and content, advertising and content measurement, audience research and services development. With your permission we and our partners may use precise geolocation data and identification through device scanning. You may click to consent to our and our 1468 partners’ processing as described above. Alternatively you may click to refuse to consent or access more detailed information and change your preferences before consenting. Please note that some processing of your personal data may not require your consent, but you have a right to object to such processing. Your preferences will apply to this website only. You can change your preferences or withdraw your consent at any time by returning to this site and clicking the "Privacy" button at the bottom of the webpage.
MORE OPTIONS
DECLINE ALL
ACCEPT ALL
Skip to main content
Intended for healthcare professionals
Access/Profile
Cart
Browse by discipline
Information for
DIGITAL HEALTH
Impact Factor: 2.9 / 5-Year Impact Factor: 3.7
JOURNAL HOMEPAGE
SUBMIT PAPER
Open access
Research article
First published online June 11, 2024
Change in disease burden associated with influenza and air pollutants during the COVID-19 pandemic in Hong Kong
Yanwen Liu, Xie Jingyu, […], and Lin Yang
https://orcid.org/0000-0002-5964-3233
l.yang@polyu.edu.hk+4View all authors and affiliations
All Articles
https://doi.org/10.1177/20552076241261892
Contents
PDF / ePub
Cite article
Share options
Information, rights and permissions
Metrics and citations
Figures and tables
Abstract
Objectives
This study aimed to estimate the variation in disease burden associated with air pollutants and other respiratory viruses during the COVID-19 pandemic.
Methods
We adopted a machine learning approach to calculate the excess mortality attributable to air pollutants and influenza, during the pre-pandemic and pandemic period.
Results
In the first 2 years of the COVID-19 pandemic, there were 8762 (95% confidence interval, 7503–9993), and 12,496 (11,718–13,332) excess all-cause deaths in Hong Kong. These figures correspond to 117.4 and 167.9 per 100,000 population, and 12.6% and 8.5% of total deaths in 2020 and 2021, respectively. Compared to the period before the pandemic, excess deaths from all-causes, cardiovascular and respiratory diseases, pneumonia and influenza attributable to influenza A and B significantly decreased in all age groups. However, excess deaths associated with ozone increased in all age-disease categories, while the relative change of nitrogen dioxide (NO2) and particular matters less than 10 µm (PM10) associated burden showed a varied pattern.
Conclusions
A notable shift in disease burden attributable to influenza and air pollutants was observed in the pandemic period, suggesting that both direct and indirect impacts shall be considered when assessing the global and regional burden of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Introduction
As of 10 March 2024, the World Health Organization (WHO) reported that the COVID-19 pandemic has caused 775 million infections and 7 million deaths worldwide.1 Prior to the availability of vaccines in early 2021, global health authorities adopted various strategies to curb the spread of the virus. Mainland China and the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region, which implemented a Zero-COVID policy to eradicate community outbreaks, enforced stringent public health and social measures. These included strict border control, mandatory quarantine for incoming travelers, and the promotion of social distancing through work-from-home policies and school closures.2–4 Mask mandates were also enforced from July 2020.5 As a result, Hong Kong recorded a relatively low number of COVID-19 cases and a low mortality rate in the first year of the pandemic, with only 148 deaths in 2020.6
The COVID-19 outbreak has significantly interfered the seasonal patterns of other respiratory viruses. Influenza activity, for instance, has remained low in many regions or countries since 2020, largely due to enhanced personal hygiene and social distancing measures.7 The 2019–2020 winter influenza season in Hong Kong was remarkably shorter than previous seasons,8 which likely resulted in a significant reduction in disease burden attributable to the influenza virus. Prior to the pandemic, the WHO estimated that seasonal influenza was associated with 3 to 5 million cases globally and 290,000 to 650,000 respiratory deaths annually.9 In Hong Kong, our previous studies estimated that influenza resulted in approximately one thousand annual deaths and tens of thousands of hospitalizations.10,11 Most influenza-associated deaths occurred in people with chronic diseases and the elderly, who were also at higher risks of severe infections and deaths from COVID-19. Hence, the displacement of mortality or morbidity of susceptible populations by COVID-19 might have offset the disease burden caused by influenza. Similarly, improved air quality has been reported during the pandemic, likely due to social distancing and reduced economic activities.12 While the direct effects of these containment measures on COVID-19 have been intensively evaluated,3,13 few studies have investigated their indirect effects on the disease burden of other respiratory viruses and air pollution. A few studies estimated excess all-cause mortality in the pandemic across countries.14 However, most just calculated the difference between observed deaths and seasonal baseline based on simple time-series models, few have considered other factors such as air pollution, temperature, and influenza in their models.
Previous ecological studies on the disease burden associated with influenza have often used time-series modeling approaches such as quasi-Poisson regression or linear regression models.15,16 These models share a common approach to calculating excess mortality. Initially, a model is fitted to the observed data and seasonal baselines are estimated from the model under the assumption that virus proxies are zero. The disease burden is then quantified by excess mortality, calculated as the difference between the observed data and the predicted baseline data. However, the selection of regression models and virus proxies remains a topic of debate. For example, the quasi-Poisson model with a log-link function has been used for weekly counts of all-cause and cause-specific mortality, but it has faced criticism for assuming a log-linear relationship between virus proxies and outcomes. The Gaussian linear model, which assumes a linear relationship between virus proxies and outcome variables, often yields negative effect estimates for virus proxies. These time-series models incorporate covariates such as seasonal trends, temperature, humidity, and proxies for influenza virus activities.15,17
In this study, we used a machine learning modeling strategy, eXtreme Gradient Boosting (XGBoost), to estimate the disease burden attributable to influenza and environmental factors. The XGBoost model offers the flexibility of assessing the marginal effect of each variable and minimizes overfitting through regularization penalties, bootstrapping of samples and cross-validation. This model has been applied to various research topics, including prediction models for disease incidence and prognosis, as well as the mortality burden of air pollution.18–20 We also compared the XGBoost model estimates with those from the general additive model (GAM) with a Gaussian link function, which has been used in previous studies on the disease burden of influenza.15,21
Method
Data
We obtained individual death records from 2014 to 2021 in Hong Kong from the Census and Statistics Department of the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region, China. These records were then aggregated to weekly death counts based on the International Classification of Diseases, Tenth Revision (ICD-10). As in our previous studies,10,11 we considered the following categories: all-cause (ICD-10 codes A00-Z99), cardiovascular and respiratory diseases (CRD, ICD-10 codes I00-I99&J00-J99), and pneumonia and influenza (P&I, ICD-10 codes J10-J18). We further divided weekly death counts into six age groups: 0−19, 20–39, 40–64, 65–84, and 85+ years. These age groups were selected to be consistent with our previous research on influenza disease burden.10 Population data of these age groups were obtained from the Census and Statistics Department of Hong Kong. Weekly age-specific population size was calculated from annual mid-year age-specific population using a LOESS smooth function. Influenza surveillance data and weekly COVID-19 death counts were retrieved from the Centre for Health Protection. Meteorological data, including daily temperature and relative humidity, were downloaded from the Hong Kong Observatory website. Air pollution data, including hourly concentrations of particular matter less than 10 µm in diameter (PM10), ozone (O3) and nitrogen dioxide (NO2), were retrieved from the 18 General and Roadside Air Quality Monitoring Stations of the Environmental Protection Department.
Statistical models
Model development
We first trained the XGBoost models on weekly death data by age groups. Weekly proportions of specimens testing positive for influenza type A (subtype H1N1 and H3N2) or type B were added to the models as proxy variables for influenza. The models also included weekly averages of mean, maximum, and minimum temperature, weekly average relative humidity, and weekly average concentration of PM10, O3 and NO2. Other covariates in the models were week and year dummies to adjust for seasonal and annual trends. Weekly age-specific population was used as an offset in the model to adjust for population size.
Before fitting the models, weekly COVID-19 deaths were subtracted from weekly mortality data. We first trained the XGBoost model by repeatedly fitting models to the pre-pandemic data (2014–2019). We assumed different learning rates and maximum tree depth during the validation process with a fivefold cross-validation to prevent overfitting. The training procedure of the XGBoost models was conducted separately on all-cause mortality and cause-specific mortality by different age groups. The model parameters and number of boosted trees were decided based on the log-likelihood.
We also adopted a classical time-series modeling approach, the GAM model with a Gaussian link function, which has been used in previous studies on the disease burden of influenza and air pollution. We fit the GAM models to all-cause mortality and cause-specific mortality, with adjustment for overfitting.22 The best-fit GAM model was selected after fivefold cross-validation. Cubic splines were applied to covariates like week number, average temperature, and relative humidity with 10 knots each. Similar to the XGBoost model, the GAM models also added weekly age-specific population size as an offset to adjust for age structure change over time.
Estimation of mortality burden
The mortality burden during the pre-pandemic and pandemic period was assessed using the following measurements: (1) Overall excess mortality in the pandemic: this was calculated as the difference between the observed death counts in 2020–2021 and the predicted counts from the XGBoost and GAM models using the observed data of covariates (meteorological data, air pollutants, and influenza). (2) Excess mortality associated with influenza: We first estimated the influenza baseline mortality by setting the influenza proxy variable in 2020–2021 to zero (i.e. assuming no influenza virus activity) in the models. The difference between the observed death counts in 2020–2021 and the influenza baseline mortality was the excess mortality specifically attributable to influenza. (3) Excess mortality associated with air pollution: Using PM10 as an example, we first estimated the PM10 baseline mortality by setting the PM10 variable in 2020–2021 to its minimum value during the pre-pandemic period (9.7 µg/m3) and subtracted this baseline data from the observed data to calculate excess mortality specifically attributable to PM10. A similar calculation was repeated for NO2 and O3 (minimum values 23.8 and 13.8 µg/m3, respectively). Considering the potential delay in mortality effects, we also calculated the lag effects up to 14 days prior for each influenza proxy and air pollutant. The 95% confidence interval (CI) for each estimate was calculated using bootstrapping for 10,000 times.
All data analysis was conducted using the “H2O” and “xgboost” packages in R software (version 4.1.0) (R Foundation for Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria). The R codes are publicly accessible at https://github.com/yanglinpolyu/covid-excess-mortality.
Results
Mortality burden during the pre-pandemic and pandemic period
Figure 1 shows a comparison of weekly mortality rates specific to different age groups during the pre-pandemic (2014–2019) and pandemic period (2020–2021). Mortality rates for all categories increased in the age groups of 20–39, 40–64, and 85+ during the pandemic compared to the pre-pandemic period. The numbers of all-cause deaths showed a sudden drop from February to April 2020, but gradually increased thereafter, peaking in early 2021 (Figure 2). Influenza nearly disappeared during these two years, with a small peak of influenza type B in winter 2020 only (Figure S1). Air pollutants generally remained at a relatively low level during the pandemic, with a sudden drop in early 2020 (except O3), and gradually returned to pre-pandemic levels thereafter.
Figure 1. Weekly all-cause and cause-specific mortality by age group, during the pre- and pandemic period. CRD, cardiovascular and respiratory diseases; P&I, pneumonia and influenza.
Figure 2. Observed and fitted weekly all-cause mortality data by age groups. The XGBoost (blue line) and GAM models (red line) were developed from the training data from 2014 to 2019 and used to predict the data