Advertisement
Journals
Books
Sign in through your institution
Issues
Advance Articles
Special Collections
Submit
Purchase
About
Journal of Economic Entomology
This issue
ESA Publications
Entomology
Books
Journals
Oxford Academic
Advanced Search
Volume 104 Issue 1
1 February 2011
< Previous
Next >
JOURNAL ARTICLE
Efficacy of Ozone Fumigation Against the Major Grain Pests in Stored Wheat Get access
E. L. Bonjour,
G. P. Opit,
J. Hardin,
C. L. Jones,
M. E. Payton,
R. L. Beeby
Journal of Economic Entomology, Volume 104, Issue 1, 1 February 2011, Pages 308–316, https://doi.org/10.1603/EC10200
Published: 01 February 2011 Article history
Cite
Permissions
Share
Abstract
Field experiments were conducted in steel bins containing 13,600 kg of hard red winter wheat, Triiticum aestivum L. One bin was treated with ozone and the second bin served as a control. Stored grain insects were placed in bins for 1-, 2-, 3-, and 4-d exposure periods in sampling tubes to test ozone concentrations of 0, 25, 50, and 70 parts per million by volume (ppmv). Ozone treatments on eggs and larvae of Plodia interpunctella (Hübner) were not effective, but pupae were more susceptible. Sitophilus oryzae (L.) adults were the most susceptible species with 100% mortality reached after 2 d in all ozone treatments. However, some progeny were produced at all concentrations and exposure periods. Tribolium castaneum (Herbst) adults had 100% mortality only after 4 d at 50 or 70 ppmv. No T. castaneum progeny were produced after 2-4 d at 70 ppmv. For Rhyzopertha dominica (F.), Cryptolestes ferrugineus (Stephens), and Oryzaephilus surinamensis (L.), 100% mortality was never achieved and progeny were produced at all ozone concentrations. Laboratory experiments, testing the effectiveness of ozone in controlling psocids, were conducted in two polyvinyl chloride cylinders each containing 55 kg of hard red winter wheat. Ozone treatment at a concentration of 70 ppmv was highly effective against adult female Liposcelis bostrychophila Badonnel and Liposcelis paeta Pearman after only 1 d of exposure. However, it was not effective against eggs of both species at all exposure periods. Ozonation has potential for the control of some stored grain insect pests on wheat.
ozone, stored wheat, stored grain beetles, psocids, insect control
Issue Section: STORED-PRODUCT
This content is only available as a PDF.
© 2011 Entomological Society of America
You do not currently have access to this article.
Sign in
Get help with access
Entomological Society of America members
Sign in through society site
Personal account
Sign in with email/username & password
Get email alerts
Save searches
Purchase content
Activate your purchase/trial code
Add your ORCID iD
Sign in
Register
Institutional access
Sign in through your institution
Sign in with a library card
Sign in with username/password
Recommend to your librarian
Institutional account management
Sign in as administrator
Purchase
Subscription prices and ordering for this journal
Purchasing options for books and journals across Oxford Academic
Short-term Access
To purchase short-term access, please sign in to your personal account above.
Don't already have a personal account? Register
Efficacy of Ozone Fumigation Against the Major Grain Pests in Stored Wheat - 24 Hours access
EUR €39.00 GBP £34.00 USD $42.00
Rental
This article is also available for rental through DeepDyve.
Advertisement
CITATIONS
69
VIEWS
212
ALTMETRIC
More metrics information
Email alerts
Article activity alert
Advance article alerts
New issue alert
Receive exclusive offers and updates from Oxford Academic
Recommended
Effectiveness of Spinosad on Four Classes of Wheat Against Five Stored-Product Insects
Fang, Liang et al., Journal of Economic Entomology, 2002
Effects of Short Exposures to Spinosad-Treated Wheat or Maize on Four Stored-Grain Insects
Athanassiou, Christos G. et al., Journal of Economic Entomology, 2010
Variation in Susceptibility of Field Strains of Three Stored Grain Insect Species to Spinosad and Chlorpyrifos-Methyl Plus Deltamethrin on Hard Red Winter Wheat
Sehgal, Blossom et al., Journal of Economic Entomology, 2013
Different Deficit Irrigation Lower Limits and Irrigation Quotas Affect the Yield and Water Use Efficiency of Winter Wheat by Regulating Photosynthetic Characteristics
Huiqin Li et al., Phyton, International Journal of Experimental Botany, 2023
Hematobiochemical and histopathological alterations in Nile Tilapia (Oreochromis niloticus) exposed to ethidium bromide: The protective role of Spirulina platensis
Sabreen Abdullah et al., Aquaculture and Fisheries, 2022
Association of short-term exposure to ambient fine particle matter with hospital admission risks and costs in China, a case-crossover study
Yuze Gao et al., Global Transitions, 2023
Powered by
I consent to the use of Google Analytics and related cookies across the TrendMD network (widget, website, blog). For more information, see our Privacy Settings and Terms of Use.
Yes No
Citing articles via
Web of Science (62)
Google Scholar
Most Read
Latest
Most Cited
Benefits and Risks of Intercropping for Crop Resilience and Pest Management
Higher prevalence of sacbrood virus in Apis mellifera (Hymenoptera: Apidae) colonies after pollinating highbush blueberries
Assessment of the USDA Biomass Harvest Trap (USDA-BHT) device as an insect harvest and mosquito surveillance tool
Drosophila suzukii (Diptera: Drosophilidae): A Decade of Research Towards a Sustainable Integrated Pest Management Program
Insect frass composition and potential use as an organic fertilizer in circular economies
More from Oxford Academic
Biological Sciences
Entomology
Invertebrates
Science and Mathematics
Zoology and Animal Sciences
Books
Journals
About Journal of Economic Entomology
Editorial Board
Policies
Author Guidelines
Contact Us
Advertising and Corporate Services
Entomology Today
Facebook
Twitter
YouTube
Purchase
Recommend to Your Librarian
Online ISSN 1938-291X Print ISSN 0022-0493 Copyright © 2024 Entomological Society of America
About Oxford Academic
Publish journals with us
University press partners
What we publish
New features 
Authoring
Open access
Purchasing
Institutional account management
Rights and permissions
Get help with access
Accessibility
Contact us
Advertising
Media enquiries
Oxford University Press
News
Oxford Languages
University of Oxford
Oxford University Press is a department of the University of Oxford. It furthers the University's objective of excellence in research, scholarship, and education by publishing worldwide
Copyright © 2024 Oxford University Press Cookie settings Cookie policy Privacy policy Legal notice
Oxford University Press uses cookies to enhance your experience on our website. By selecting ‘accept all’ you are agreeing to our use of cookies. You can change your cookie settings at any time. More information can be found in our Cookie Policy.
Reject and manage
Accept all