T&F eBooks
‍
Advanced Search
Login
About Us
Subjects
Browse
Products
Request a trial
Librarian Resources
What's New!!
HomeFood Science & TechnologyFood Additives & IngredientsChickpea and CowpeaProcessing Mediated Changes in the Nutritional Profile of Chickpea and Cowpea
Chapter
Processing Mediated Changes in the Nutritional Profile of Chickpea and Cowpea
ByMousumi Sabat, Mounika Reddy, Pramod Shelake, Shilpa S. Selvan, Shweta Manik, C. Nickhil, Adinath Kate, Debabandya Mohapatra
Book
Chickpea and Cowpea
Edition 1st Edition
First Published 2023
Imprint CRC Press
Pages 36
eBook ISBN 9781003382027
Share
ABSTRACT
Chickpeas (Cicer arietinum) and cowpeas (Vigna unguiculata) are major legume crops worldwide. Both crops are cultivated in more than 35 countries and, in different forms, are part of the daily diet of billions of people. These legume crops are rich in protein, minerals, antioxidants and beneficial fatty acids. Traditionally, they are consumed either in decorticated or whole form, soaked and cooked, germinated, malted, fermented, or roasted or made into flours to prepare a variety of food items, including extruded and baked products. As plant-based proteins are the new trend, protein concentrates, protein isolates, protein hydrolysates, and texturized proteins are also being derived from them through a wide range of advanced techniques, such as infrared and microwave heating and ozone treatment, to name a few. The nutritional profile of these legumes, thus, changes. In this chapter, we have tried to summarize the processing-mediated modifications in the protein, amino acid, mineral and bioactive compounds.
Previous Chapter
Next Chapter
You do not have access to this content currently. Please click 'Get Access' button to see if you or your institution have access to this content.
GET ACCESS

To purchase a print version of this book for personal use or request an inspection copy 
GO TO ROUTLEDGE.COM

Policies
Privacy Policy
Terms & Conditions
Cookie Policy
Journals
Taylor & Francis Online
Corporate
Taylor & Francis Group
Help & Contact
Students/Researchers
Librarians/Institutions
Connect with us
Registered in England & Wales No. 3099067
5 Howick Place | London | SW1P 1WG
© 2024 Informa UK Limited