This website utilizes technologies such as cookies to enable essential site functionality, as well as for analytics, personalization, and targeted advertising. You may change your settings at any time or accept the default settings. You may close this banner to continue with only essential cookies. Privacy Policy
Storage Preferences
Targeted Advertising
Personalization
Analytics
Save
Accept All
Reject All
IEEE.org
IEEE Xplore
IEEE SA
IEEE Spectrum
More Sites
Subscribe
Donate
Cart
Create Account
Personal Sign In
Browse
My Settings
Help
Institutional Sign In
All
Books
Conferences
Courses
Journals & Magazines
Standards
Authors
Citations
ADVANCED SEARCH
Journals & Magazines >IEEE Journal of Selected Topi... >Volume: 17
NO2 Air Pollution Trends and Settlement Growth in Megacities
Publisher: IEEE
Cite This
PDF
Thilo Erbertseder; Hannes Taubenböck; Thomas Esch; Lorenza Gilardi; Heiko Paeth
All Authors
23
Full
Text Views
Open Access
Under a Creative Commons License
Abstract
Document Sections
I.
Introduction
II.
Study Area and Data
III.
Methodology
IV.
Results
V.
Discussion
Show Full Outline
Authors
Figures
References
Keywords
Metrics
Footnotes
Abstract:
Megacities exert substantial demands on the world's energy resources, thereby producing large shares of atmospheric emissions and air pollution. Despite several studies on nitrogen dioxide (NO 2 ) changes in megacities, a systematic analysis in relation to settlement growth is still pending. This study examines the trends of tropospheric NO 2 pollution in 38 megacities regarding settlement growth by analyzing Earth Observation data. Multiannual records of tropospheric NO 2 from Global Ozone Monitoring Experiment (GOME), Scanning Imaging Absorption Spectrometer for Atmospheric Chartography, GOME-2A, and GOME-2B are evaluated regarding the World Settlement Footprint evolution from 1996 to 2015. Compared to previous studies, this work strictly uses remote sensing data and the spatial concept of functional urban areas. Therefore, uncertainties due to inconsistent spatial references, incomparable administrative units, as well as heterogeneously reported local data are widely excluded to enable an appropriate comparison of megacities across the globe. On average, we observe an increase in tropospheric NO 2 burden of 5.06 ± 0.83%/year and a relative settlement growth of 2.87%/year for the time period considered. We find a wide range of trends: relative NO 2 pollution ranges from an increase of 44.0 ± 5.9%/year to a decrease of −3.2 ± 0.2%/year, settlement growth rates vary from 0.3%/year to 9.5%/year. Despite this variety, the results exhibit a pronounced relation to the income group following the world's economies classification of the World Bank. Complemented by a cluster analysis and ranking of the megacities, the study provides indicators to develop a better understanding of the drivers and impacts of urbanization and air pollution.
Published in: IEEE Journal of Selected Topics in Applied Earth Observations and Remote Sensing ( Volume: 17)
Page(s): 12058 - 12076
Date of Publication: 26 June 2024
ISSN Information:
DOI: 10.1109/JSTARS.2024.3419573
Publisher: IEEE
Funding Agency:
Authors
Figures
References
Keywords
Metrics
Footnotes
More Like This
Air Pollution Monitoring System Using Waspmote Gases Sensor Board in Wireless Sensor Network
2020 International Conference on Data Science, Artificial Intelligence, and Business Analytics (DATABIA)
Published: 2020
Lidar monitoring of air pollution over urban area
Conference on Lasers and Electro-Optics Europe
Published: 1994
Show More
IEEE Personal Account
CHANGE USERNAME/PASSWORD
Purchase Details
PAYMENT OPTIONS
VIEW PURCHASED DOCUMENTS
Profile Information
COMMUNICATIONS PREFERENCES
PROFESSION AND EDUCATION
TECHNICAL INTERESTS
Need Help?
US & CANADA: +1 800 678 4333
WORLDWIDE: +1 732 981 0060
CONTACT & SUPPORT
Follow
About IEEE Xplore | Contact Us | Help | Accessibility | Terms of Use | Nondiscrimination Policy | IEEE Ethics Reporting | Sitemap | IEEE Privacy Policy
A not-for-profit organization, IEEE is the world's largest technical professional organization dedicated to advancing technology for the benefit of humanity.
© Copyright 2024 IEEE - All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies.