Journals & Books
Help
Search
My account
Sign in
Access through your institution
Purchase PDF
Article preview
Abstract
Introduction
Section snippets
References (79)
Science of The Total Environment
Volume 947
, 15 October 2024, 174669
Comparative life cycle assessment of various hydrogen supply methods from Australia to the Republic of Korea in environmental and economic aspects
Author links open overlay panel
Gang Nam Lee a
,
Jong Mu Kim b
,
Kwang Hyo Jung b
,
Hyun Park b
Show more
Add to Mendeley
Share
Cite
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2024.174669
Get rights and content
Highlights
•
Hydrogen supply from Australia to Korea were analyzed in environmental and economic aspects.
•
Various storage types and alternative fuels were considered to transport blue hydrogen by ocean.
•
The environmental effects were investigated over the life cycle of the hydrogen ocean transport.
•
Revealed that the LNG showed the lowest emissions and hydrogen price compared to other hydrogen carriers.
Abstract
With the increasing importance of decarbonization to prevent global climate change, hydrogen supply has received considerable attention from several countries, including Korea and Japan, due to the growing demand for the implementation of a hydrogen economy. This study conducted a comprehensive analysis on hydrogen supply methods from Australia to the Republic of Korea in environmental and economic aspects using a life cycle assessment (LCA). The blue hydrogen produced in Australia was considered for import to the Republic of Korea via ocean shipping. The study analyzed the holistic environmental effects in the life cycle of hydrogen ocean transport for various types of hydrogen storage methods (CH2, LH2, LOHC, LNH3, and LNG), as well as alternative marine fuels (MGO, LNG, LPG, CH2, LH2, LNG-LH2, MeOH, and LNH3) for ship transportation. Environmental impact performance was presented in terms of global warming potential (GWP), acidification potential (AP), photochemical ozone creation potential (POCP), eutrophication potential (EP), and particulate matter (PM). For the environmental results, sensitivity studies were conducted to analyze the effects of operating distance and cargo tank size when shipping hydrogen via ocean transport. Additionally, the GWP results of the transportation of green hydrogen and ammonia were compared with those of blue hydrogen and ammonia transport. A cost analysis was performed for the overall processes of hydrogen ocean transport, and the results were included in the study with the estimated hydrogen price for each transportation method.
Graphical abstract
Download: Download high-res image (112KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Introduction
Regarding climate change, the United Nations has warned that ‘global boiling’ has arrived (Kamal, 2023), consequently, decarbonization has become a key topic in recent global energy trends. As an alternative energy option for the future, hydrogen has been globally spotlighted as a primary energy carrier due to its high energy density with extremely low air pollution emissions, when produced using renewable energy sources.
Hydrogen has been considered as a main energy carrier for decades, especially by developed countries for transportation and power generation (Behling et al., 2015). The European Union (EU) expects hydrogen to play an important role in aims to be climate neutral by 2050 with their strategy to lead the hydrogen markets for industrial applications and mobility as presented in the EU strategy on hydrogen (García-Herrero et al., 2021). Furthermore, the Fit-for-55 package (EU Commission, Press Release, 2021) put forward concrete policy proposals for hydrogen to accelerate the decarbonization of the EU's energy system. The United States (US), a major crude oil producer, has identified hydrogen as a key future energy source in the ‘Road map to a US Hydrogen Economy’ (Cell, 2020). To realize this vision, the Department of Energy (DOE) has initiated projects and actions with policies and investments in hydrogen technology (McQueen et al., 2020). Japan, which relies on imports for most of its energy supply (International Energy Agency, 2021), has also made an effort to take a lead in developing a hydrogen economy has established a ‘Basic hydrogen strategy’ (Japan, 2020), which is the world's first governmental hydrogen strategy (Nagashima, 2018). For many decades already, Japan has been investing in hydrogen technologies for production, storage, and utilization of hydrogen to follow the Paris Agreement and reduce greenhouse gas (GHGs) emissions by 80 % by 2050. Recently, Japan succeeded in importing liquefied hydrogen over long distances via ship through the Hydrogen Energy Supply Chain (HESC) project (Gielen et al., 2019a). Likewise, many countries are actively working at the governmental level to establih a hydrogen economy.
Recently, the Korean government has also established comprehensive plans to realize a domestic hydrogen society to meet the goal of being carbon neutral by 2050 (Oh et al., 2021). The government began regulating GHG emissions with the announcement of the ‘Basic Roadmap for National GHG Reduction for 2030’ in 2016 (Ministry of Environment, The Korean Government, 2016), and the plan was detailed in the ‘Renewable Energy 3020 Implementation Plan’ to incorporate more clean energy in power generation and supply chains (Ministry of Environment, The Korean Government, 2017). The government has also set the goal of transitioning the carbon-based Korean economy into a hydrogen-based economy as presented by the ‘Hydrogen Economy Activation Roadmap’ in 2019. This plan includes the development of technologies for hydrogen production, storage, and transportation, aiming to supply more than 5.26 million tons of hydrogen by 2040. However, over 80 % of the required hydrogen needs to be imported to archive the goal, as outlined in the 2021 ‘Carbon Neutral Scenario of Korea by 2050’ (The Korean Government, 2019).
For hydrogen transportation over long distances, storage technologies for hydrogen are crucial due to its low volume density. There are several potential options for storing in ships, such as liquid hydrogen (LH2), compressed hydrogen (CH2), liquid organic hydrogen carrier (LOHC), and ammonia (NH3). Each storage method has its own set of advantages and disadvantages based on properties like as hydrogen weight in a unit volume or mass of the hydrogen carrier, and storage temperature. CH2 can be stored at a relatively high temperature compared to LH2, but it has a lower density compared to other hydrogen carrier methods. LH2 has a density 1.7 times higher than CH2 (under a tank pressure of 700 bar), but it requires storage temperatures below −253 °C, which requires a significant amount of energy input. LNH3 and LOHC, using methyl cyclo hexane (MCH), have higher density with relatively high storage temperatures compared to CH2 and LH2, but they have toxicity issues that make storage in a tank challenging. Additionally, more processes are required to produce the carriers from hydrogen, which demands energy and results in the emission of environmental pollutants during the process.
In recent years, numerous studies have examined hydrogen storage methods for ocean transportation, considering technical and economic aspects to tackle the growing concerns related to global warming.
Ratnakar et al. (Ratnakar et al., 2021) reviewed the cost efficiency and technologies of LH2 ocean transportation and showed that LH2 has advantages in terms of familiarity with LNG technology. However, it also has disadvantages such as limitations for large-scale storage due to its significant boil-off gas, insulation issues, lack of scaled-up design, limited data, and other factors. Alkhaledi et al. (Alkhaledi et al., 2022) analyzed the economics of an LH2 carrier named called JAMILA, with a capacity of 280,000 m3 fueled by hydrogen. Their economic analysis suggested that an LH2 carrier could be a promising and sustainable option for long-term hydrogen ocean transport by sea. Kamiya et al. (Kamiya et al., 2015) investigated the feasibility of LH2 as a hydrogen carrier from Australia to Japan, considering cost and technologies, and compared it with the advantages of CH2. The study concluded that an LH2 carrier could be a competitive option if a carbon tax is taken into account, and emphasized the need for a high-efficiency large-scale hydrogen carrier to archive economic advantages and ensure a safe design.
Nowadays, LNH3 is often considered the most feasible option as a hydrogen carrier in ocean transport. Kojima and Yamaguchi (Kojima and Yamaguchi, 2022) studied the properties and efficiencies of LNH3 as a hydrogen carrier compared to LH2 and LOHC. They showed that the energy efficiency of LNH3 was higher than LH2 and LOHC, with the lowest cost due to the extremely low cost of the Haber-Bosch process to produce LNH3. Wan et al. (Wan et al., 2021) also demonstrated that LNH3 is a promising and efficient hydrogen carrier because it can be directly decomposed into hydrogen. Moreover, it can be more effective when used as a clean fuel with solid oxide fuel cells (SOFCs) to generate power during ocean transport.
Recently, LOHC has been highlighted as a potential hydrogen carrier because it is easy to handle with similar properties to crude oil, and it does not produce any air pollution during the binding or release of hydrogen. Wang et al. (Wang et al., 2016) studied the energy efficiency of a LOHC-based hydrogen storage, transport, and supply system, and showed that the energy efficiency of LOHC was generally lower than that of CH2 under 350 and 700 bar. Niermann et al. (Niermann et al., 2019) compared various types of LOHC based on their chemical and economic properties, showing that LOHC is a promising hydrogen carrier for the area of energy transport. However, Modisha et al. (Modisha et al., 2019) reported that LOHC technology is still at an early stage in view of the hydrogenation and dehydrogenation process, with an analysis of the recent technologies in LOHC and the performances of different catalyst materials on hydrogen productivity and stability.
For overseas hydrogen supply, polluting exhaust gas emissions during ocean transport by hydrogen cargo ships may also have a significant influence on the total environmental impact over the entire life cycle of hydrogen ocean transport. To reduce emissions during ship operation for hydrogen transportation, various types of fuels have been studied as alternative eco-friendly ship fuels.
Emissions during ship operation for hydrogen ocean transport are also important parameters to verify the feasibility of hydrogen supply from abroad when transported by ship. To reduce environmental pollution in shipping, the International Maritime Organization (IMO) established regulations to limit the emission level for NOx and SOx to 3.4 g/kWh (under 130 rpm) and 0.5 %, respectively, for ships operating in the Emission Control Area (ECA) (International Maritime Organization (I.M.O.), 2008; International Maritime Organization (I.M.O.), 2015). The IMO also continues to limit GHG emissions in the recommendations of the 72nd Marine Environmental Protection Committee (MEPC) to reduce GHG emissions by 50 % compared with 2008 by 2050 (International Maritime Organization (I.M.O.), 2018). The target has been enhanced to net-zero by 2050 in the 80th MEPC, with at least a 70 % reduction of GHG by 2040 (International Maritime Organization (I.M.O.), 2023a). To fulfill the regulations on ship emissions, various alternative ship fuels like marine gas oil (MGO), liquefied natural gas (LNG), liquefied propane gas (LPG), hydrogen, and so on, have been considered and have started to replace the conventional ship fuel of heavy fuel oil (HFO). Recently, methanol (MeOH) has emerged as one of the promising alternative ship fuels because of low GHG emissions in its life cycle (Ammar, 2019). Ammonia (NH3) and LNG-H2 dual fuel engines are also widely developed to be used as ship fuels due to low emissions during ship operation (Gielen et al., 2019b).
For the GHG regulations in the life cycle, the IMO is currently working on a GHG regulation guideline based on the lifecycle of ship fuels (International Maritime Organization (I.M.O.), 2023b). The guideline is to expand the GHG regulation for the entire lifecycle of ship fuels, which includes the Well to Tank and Tank to Wake phases from the fuel's production to usage during ship operation. To compare and verify the potential alternative ship fuels, it is necessary to consider not only the environmental and economic effects in their lifecycle but also the sea route, ship speed, type of hydrogen storage method, and other specific information. This is because the alternative fuels have their pros and cons that can vary with ship operating conditions and their lifecycle.
To comply with the IMO's SOx regulation to reduce emissions by more than 0.5 % from 2020 (International Maritime Organization (I.M.O.), 2008), MGO, with a low sulfur content of about 0.5 wt% (McKinlay et al., 2021), has been widely utilized to substitute HFO for reducing SOx emissions during ship operations. However, the use of MGO requires additional equipment, such as selective catalytic reduction (SCR), to meet regulations on