This website uses cookies
We occasionally run membership recruitment campaigns on social media channels and use cookies to track post-clicks. We also share information about your use of our site with our social media, advertising and analytics partners who may combine it with other information that you’ve provided to them or that they’ve collected from your use of their services. Use the check boxes below to choose the types of cookies you consent to have stored on your device.
Use necessary cookies only Allow selected cookies Allow all cookies
Necessary
Preferences
Statistics
Marketing Show details






skip to main content
Browse About
Sign in Register
Journals
Magazines
Proceedings
Books
SIGs
Conferences
People
Search ACM Digital Library
Advanced Search
Conference
Proceedings
Upcoming Events
Authors
Affiliations
Award Winners
HomeConferencesPETRAProceedingsPETRA '24Toward Health-Centered Monitoring framework promoting Well-Being and Nature-based Solutions
RESEARCH-ARTICLE
OPEN ACCESS
Share on
Toward Health-Centered Monitoring framework promoting Well-Being and Nature-based Solutions
Authors: Charalampos Zafeiropoulos
, Anastasios Temenos
, Aikaterini Angeli
, Aggeliki Giakoumaki
, Parisis Gallos
, Elsa Katsorida
, and Anastasios Doulamis
Authors Info & Claims
PETRA '24: Proceedings of the 17th International Conference on PErvasive Technologies Related to Assistive Environments
June 2024
Pages 435 - 439
https://doi.org/10.1145/3652037.3663929
Published: 26 June 2024 Publication History
0
citation
21
Downloads
All formats
PDF
Information & Contributors
Bibliometrics & Citations
View Options
References
10
Media
Tables
Share
Abstract
Global geopolitical, economical, climate changes consist a major challenge for European and international cities. As a result, these cities produce inequalities in health, due to several factors such as living conditions, health-related behaviour, education, occupation and income. Therefore, urban areas are under huge pressure to enhance policies in order to become more sustainable and liveable, as well as to provide environments and social fabric that support Public Health (PH) and Wellbeing (WB). Our proposed framework addresses factors influencing PH and WB, provide evidence base (proven by clinical tests where appropriates) thus improve urban health and reduce health disparities through changes in individual behaviour of citizens, stimulated by different policies. Towards this direction, our framework will gather data, via technological devices, from citizens in order to identify the factors that affect PH and WB. Based on a preliminary analysis, results shown that the heartbeat, which is defined as the most important health factor, is mostly affected by Ozone (O3) and carbonate oxygen (CO). However most data were collected from grey areas leaving room for improvement.
References
[1]
Carmen Castro, Joaquín Bresó, Susana Sola, Aggeliki Vlachostergiou, Maria Plakia, and Ilaria Bonavita. 2022. The Role of Law Enforcement Agencies and the Use of IT Tools for a Coordinate Response in Pandemic Crisis Management: The STAMINA Project. Special Issue 5 Eur. L. Enf’t Rsch. Bull. (2022), 165.
Google Scholar
[2]
Parisis Gallos, Andreas Menychtas, Christos Panagopoulos, Maria Kaselimi, Anastasios Temenos, Ioannis Rallis, Anastasios Doulamis, Nikolaos Doulamis, Manthos Bimpas, Aikaterini Aggeli, 2022. Using mHealth technologies to promote public health and well-being in urban areas with blue-green solutions.Studies in Health Technology and Informatics 295 (2022), 566–569.
Google Scholar
[3]
Kyriakos Labropoulos, Charalampos Zafeiropoulos, Ioannis Rallis, Anastasios Doulamis, Nikolaos Doulamis, and Antonia Moropoulou. 2022. Improved Resilience and Sustainable Reconstruction of Cultural Heritage Areas to cope with Climate Change and Other Hazards based on Innovative Algorithms and Modelling Tools. Technical Annals 1, 1 (2022), 66–77.
Crossref
Google Scholar
[4]
Hai-Ying Liu, Marion Jay, and Xianwen Chen. 2021. The role of nature-based solutions for improving environmental quality, health and well-being. Sustainability 13, 19 (2021), 10950.
Crossref
Google Scholar
Show all references
Recommendations
Evaluating public health uses of health information exchange
Health information exchange (HIE) initiatives are in various stages of development across the United States. They aim to bring previously unavailable clinical data from patients' disparate health records, which may be spread over multiple provider and ...
Read More
Health Geomatics
This Methodolical Review describes how health geomatics can improve our understanding of the important relationship between location and health, and thus assist us in Public Health tasks like disease prevention, and also in better healthcare service ...
Read More
Redesigning electronic health record systems to support public health
Current electronic health record systems are primarily clinical in focus, designed to provide patient-level data and provider-level decision support. Adapting EHR systems to serve public health needs provides the possibility of enormous advances for ...
Read More
Comments
Download PDF
View Table Of Contents
Footer
Categories
Journals
Magazines
Books
Proceedings
SIGs
Conferences
Collections
People
About
About ACM Digital Library
ACM Digital Library Board
Subscription Information
Author Guidelines
Using ACM Digital Library
All Holdings within the ACM Digital Library
ACM Computing Classification System
Accessibility Statement
Join
Join ACM
Join SIGs
Subscribe to Publications
Institutions and Libraries
Connect
Contact us via email
ACM on Facebook
ACM DL on X
ACM on Linkedin
Send Feedback
Submit a Bug Report
The ACM Digital Library is published by the Association for Computing Machinery. Copyright © 2024 ACM, Inc.
Terms of Usage Privacy Policy Code of Ethics