Skip to main content
We gratefully acknowledge support from the Simons Foundation, member institutions, and all contributors. Donate
>
astro-ph
>
arXiv:2407.01480
Help | Advanced Search
All fields
Title
Author
Abstract
Comments
Journal reference
ACM classification
MSC classification
Report number
arXiv identifier
DOI
ORCID
arXiv author ID
Help pages
Full text
Search
Astrophysics > Earth and Planetary Astrophysics
[Submitted on 1 Jul 2024 (v1), last revised 2 Jul 2024 (this version, v2)]
How Land-Mass Distribution Influences the Atmospheric Dynamics of Tidally Locked Terrestrial Exoplanets
F. Sainsbury-Martinez, C. Walsh, G. J. Cooke, D. R. Marsh
Interpretation of the ongoing efforts to simulate the atmospheres of potentially-habitable terrestrial exoplanets requires that we understand the underlying dynamics and chemistry of such objects to a much greater degree than 1D or even simple 3D models enable. Here, for the tidally-locked habitable-zone planet TRAPPIST-1e, we explore one effect which can shape the dynamics and chemistry of terrestrial planets: the inclusion of an Earth-like land-ocean distribution with orography. To do this we use the Earth-system model WACCM6/CESM2 to run a pair of TRAPPIST-1e models with N_2-O_2 atmospheres and with the sub-stellar point fixed over either land or ocean. The presence of orography shapes atmospheric transport, and in the case of Earth-like orography, breaks the symmetry between the northern and southern hemispheres which was previously found in slab ocean models. For example, peak zonal jet speeds in the southern hemisphere are 50\rightarrow100\% faster than similar jets in the northern hemisphere. This also affects the meridional circulation, transporting equatorial material towards the south-pole. As a result we also find significant changes in the atmospheric chemistry, including the accumulation of potentially lethal quantities of ozone at both the south pole and the surface. Future studies which investigate the effects of land-mass distribution on the dynamics of exoplanetary atmospheres should pay close attention to both the day-side land-fraction as well as the orography of the land. Simply modelling a flat land-mass will not give a complete picture of its dynamical impact.
Comments: Submitted to ApJ
Subjects: Earth and Planetary Astrophysics (astro-ph.EP)
Cite as: arXiv:2407.01480 [astro-ph.EP]
  (or arXiv:2407.01480v2 [astro-ph.EP] for this version)
  https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2407.01480
Focus to learn more
Submission history
From: Felix Sainsbury-Martinez [view email]
[v1] Mon, 1 Jul 2024 17:10:06 UTC (46,023 KB)
[v2] Tue, 2 Jul 2024 07:59:50 UTC (46,023 KB)
Access Paper:
View PDF
HTML (experimental)
TeX Source
Other Formats
view license
Current browse context:
astro-ph.EP
< prev   |   next >
new | recent | 2024-07
Change to browse by:
astro-ph
References & Citations
NASA ADS
Google Scholar
Semantic Scholar
Export BibTeX Citation
Bookmark
Bibliographic Tools
Bibliographic and Citation Tools
Bibliographic Explorer Toggle
Bibliographic Explorer (What is the Explorer?)
Litmaps Toggle
Litmaps (What is Litmaps?)
scite.ai Toggle
scite Smart Citations (What are Smart Citations?)
Code, Data, Media
Demos
Related Papers
About arXivLabs
Which authors of this paper are endorsers? | Disable MathJax (What is MathJax?)
About
Help
Contact
Subscribe
Copyright
Privacy Policy
Web Accessibility Assistance
arXiv Operational Status
Get status notifications via email or slack