Product & Services
Subscribe
Submit a paper
Browse
Rankings
Blog↗
Contact
Create account
Sign in
  This is a preprint article, it offers immediate access but has not been peer reviewed.
Download This Paper
Open PDF in Browser
Add Paper to My Library
Share:
Mathematical Modeling of Ozone Assisted Cerium Redox Process for the Surface Removal of Stainless Steel Components Using a Static Mixer as Gas-Liquid Contactor
56 Pages Posted: 11 Jul 2024
Sukhdeep Singh
affiliation not provided to SSRN
Nirvik Sen
affiliation not provided to SSRN
V. P. Patel
affiliation not provided to SSRN
dayamoy banerjee
Indira Gandhi Center for Atomic Research (IGCAR) - Homi Bhabha National Institute
Shaji Karunakaran
affiliation not provided to SSRN
Sanjay Kumar
affiliation not provided to SSRN
Abstract
This paper deals with a cerium based redox chemical process which is used for the surface removal and decontamination of stainless steel components arising from the operation and decommissioning of nuclear facilities. The process involves the corrosion of top metal surface (~ 10-50 µm) by highly oxidizing Ce(IV) ions to remove the entrapped radionuclides, while the reduced Ce(III) ions are continuously regenerated in-situ by ozone. In this work, a lumped parameter model, accounting for the reduction of Ce(IV) to Ce(III) by steel components and the simultaneous oxidation of Ce(III) to Ce(IV) by ozone in a static mixer, has been developed. The model is experimentally validated by carrying out a corrosion experiment at 5 L scale in ~ 0.4 M solution of Ce(IV) in 4 M HNO3 at room temperature, by using non-radioactive AISI SS304L stainless steel components of different geometries viz. plate, pipe, elbow and T-Joint with a total surface area of 348 cm2 . Using the validated model, design simulations of a pilot metal decontamination facility are carried out, to illustrate the effect of process parameters on the equilibrium Ce(IV) concentration in the loop, which is critical to component corrosion and decontamination. For a given initial cerium salt concentration, increasing gas flow rate, liquid flow rate, ozone concentration, initial nitric acid concentration and volume of solution have been found to favour a desired flat Ce(IV) concentration profile in the loop; while increasing temperature and area of components led to a decline in the equilibrium Ce(IV) concentration. Additionally, reducing acidity of nitric acid has been found to limit the treatment time of components. Furthermore, the choice of a Ce(III) or Ce(IV) salt, as a source of cerium ions, has been shown to have no effect on the corrosion of metal components in a long run, when ozone regeneration of Ce(IV) is employed. Among the components of various geometries, relatively higher corrosion rates have been observed for the components with a curved geometry or a weld joint. SEM images of the welded and non-welded components show the occurrence of intergranular corrosion due to ozonated Ce(IV) solution, which is the likely mechanism for the removal of radionuclides from the metal surface.
Keywords: Cerium redox process, Ozone, Stainless steel, Corrosion, Decontamination, Modeling
Suggested Citation:
Singh, Sukhdeep and Sen, Nirvik and Patel, V. P. and banerjee, dayamoy and Karunakaran, Shaji and Kumar, Sanjay, Mathematical Modeling of Ozone Assisted Cerium Redox Process for the Surface Removal of Stainless Steel Components Using a Static Mixer as Gas-Liquid Contactor. Available at SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4892271 or http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.4892271







Download This Paper
Open PDF in Browser
33 References
E Babilas , B Brendebach
Selection and evaluation of decontamination and dismantling techniques for decommissioning of large NPPs components
Prog. in Nucl. Energy , volume 84 , p. 108 - 115 Posted: 2015
D Banerjee , U Sandhya , S A Khot , C Srinivas
Development of strippable gel for surface decontamination applications
Bhabha Atomic Research Centre , volume 18 Posted: 2015-01
J P Caire , S Cullie , F Dalard , J M Fulconis , H Delagrange
AISI 304 L stainless steel decontamination by a corrosion process using cerium(IV) regenerated by ozone Part I: Study of the accelerated corrosion process
J. Applied Electro , volume 33 , p. 703 - 708 Posted: 2003
J P Caire , S Cullie , F Dalard , J M Fulconis , H Delagrange
AISI 304 L stainless steel decontamination by a corrosion process using cerium IV regenerated by ozone Part II: Process optimization
J. Applied Electro , volume 33 , p. 709 - 715 Posted: 2003
Load more
0 Citations
Do you have a job opening that you would like to promote on SSRN?
Place Job Opening
Paper statistics
DOWNLOADS
2
ABSTRACT VIEWS
14
33 References
PlumX Metrics
Related eJournals
Energy Engineering eJournal
Follow
Feedback
Submit a Paper
Section 508 Text Only Pages
SSRN Quick Links
SSRN Solutions
Research Paper Series
Conference Papers
Partners in Publishing
Jobs & Announcements
Special Topic Hubs
SSRN Rankings
Top Papers
Top Authors
Top Organizations
About SSRN
Network Directors
Announcements
Contact us
FAQs
Copyright Terms and Conditions Privacy Policy
All content on this site: Copyright © 2023 Elsevier Inc., its licensors, and contributors. All rights are reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. For all open access content, the Creative Commons licensing terms apply.
We use cookies to help provide and enhance our service and tailor content.
To learn more, visit Cookie Settings.
We use cookies that are necessary to make our site work. We may also use additional cookies to analyze, improve, and personalize our content and your digital experience. For more information, see ourCookie Policy
Cookie Settings
Accept all cookies