Journals & Books
Help
Search
My account
Sign in
Access through your institution
Purchase PDF
Article preview
Abstract
Introduction
Section snippets
References (57)
Cited by (13)
International Journal of Food Microbiology
Volume 144, Issue 3
, 5 January 2011, Pages 331-336
Effects of ozone exposure on the xerophilic fungus, Eurotium amstelodami IS-SAB-01, isolated from naan bread
☆
Author links open overlay panel
Sanjay Antony-Babu
,
Ian Singleton
Show more
Add to Mendeley
Share
Cite
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijfoodmicro.2010.09.019
Get rights and content
Abstract
Xerophilic moulds cause contamination and spoilage of low moisture foods. This study examined the effect of ozone fumigation on growth of a Eurotium species isolated from naan bread. Two ozone treatments were used — a low-level long-term exposure (0.4 μmol/mol for 21 days) and high-level short-term exposure (300 μmol/mol for 5 to 120 min). For the low level exposure the combination of different media sucrose concentrations (0, 5, 10 and 20% w/v) with ozone treatment was also assessed. The growth of the isolate was found to be sensitive to low-level ozone fumigation depending on the media sucrose concentration and duration of the exposure. Low-level ozone exposure significantly (p < 0.05) reduced the number of asexual spores formed in media with no added sucrose, an effect not observed in media with higher sucrose levels. Electron microscope observations of colonies indicated that ozone exposed cultures produced lower numbers of cleistothecia. High-level ozone exposure for short durations reduced spore viability although 100% reduction in viability was achieved only after 120 min exposure. This work demonstrates that ozone may be used to reduce spore production in Eurotium but that the ozone effect can be mediated by sucrose levels in the growth medium.
Introduction
Xerophilic moulds are common food spoilage organisms of low moisture food such as bakery products (Abellana et al., 1999, Hocking and Pitt, 1980, Samson, 1989, Vega et al., 1998), dried fruit (Pitt and Christian, 1968) and grain flours (Beuchat and Hwang, 1996). Eurotium, a well known xerophilic fungal genus, can account for 1 to 5% loss of bakery products along with Aspergillus and Penicillium depending on the season, type of product and method of processing (Malkki and Rauha, 1978). Xerophilic organisms are well known to be tolerant to several external stresses such as desiccation (Vaamonde and Fernández, 1993), salt/sugar concentrations, pH (Guynot et al., 2002), osmotic pressure (Christensen et al., 1965, Garg and Yadav, 2007) and heat (Splittstoesser et al., 1989). Therefore preventing spoilage caused by these organisms poses a major challenge in the food industry.
Increased awareness of the harmful effects caused by use of pesticides in food has led to interests in cleaner residue free technologies (Eom, 1994, Schafer and Kegley, 2002, Wilson and Otsuki, 2004). Ozone is well known as a strong oxidising agent and can cause elevation of reactive oxygen species in living cells leading to oxidative stress in the cells. This effect has been harnessed for preservation of food, especially fresh produce (Barth et al., 1995, Liew and Prange, 1994, Tzortzakis et al., 2008). Recent work has been carried out to explore the efficiency of ozone treatment in preservation of low moisture foods (Al-Ahmadi et al., 2009, Najafi and Khodaparast, 2009). Nevertheless very little is known on the direct effect of ozone fumigation on fungal survival and development (Antony-Babu and Singleton, 2009, Tzortzakis et al., 2008) and to our knowledge no work has examined the effect of ozone exposure on xerophilic fungi. The work presented in this paper aimed to explore the effects of ozone on Eurotium amstelodami IS-SAB-01 isolated from naan bread. The potential use of ozone fumigation in food storage facilities was assessed using a low-level long term (21 days) exposure study on media containing different sucrose levels, whereas the ability of ozone to kill the fungus was examined using high level ozone exposure for short periods (0 to 120 min).
Section snippets
Source of isolate
The fungal isolate used in this study was obtained from mouldy naan breads (after the normal shelf-life period). The surface of naan bread was scraped using a sterile inoculation loop and the fungal propagules transferred onto the surface of Rose-Bengal agar (Fluka, UK) plate. This isolation media was used initially to isolate a wide variety of spoilage moulds. The plates were incubated at 28 °C for 21 days. An isolate which was morphologically identified as Eurotium sp. was used in this study.
Confirmation of taxa
Confirmation of taxa
The Eurotium isolate was slow growing on Rose-Bengal agar showing little growth even after 7 days of incubation in comparison to the other isolates which were identified as Penicillium sp. The micromorphology of the isolate showed distinctive aspergillus-like conidiation. Along with the asexual spores comparatively larger cleistothecia and ascospores with conspicuous equatorial furrows were also observed. The 28S rRNA gene sequence analysis showed maximum identity (99.1%) with E. amstelodami.
Discussion
Members of the genus Eurotium are well known agents of spoilage in food with low moisture, such as bakery products (Abellana et al., 1999, Lund et al., 1996, Vinaixa et al., 2004) and dried fruit (Gherbawy, 2001, Romero et al., 2005, Yildiz and Çoksöyler, 2002, Zohri and Abdel-Gawad, 1993). The strain of Eurotium isolated in this study was assigned to belong to the genus initially by morphological characteristics and then confirmed to the species E. amstelodami based on 28S rRNA gene phylogeny.
Concluding remarks
Due to the known heat resistance of Eurotium sp. ozone treatment could be useful to reduce spoilage by this organism. The growth of the isolate and its ability to produce conidia were found to be sensitive to ozone fumigation but effects varied depending on the concentration of sucrose added to the growth medium and duration of exposure to ozone. It was also observed that ozone induced oxidative stress appeared to reduce formation of cleistothecia, an effect not observed previously. Conidia of
Acknowledgements
The authors like to thank Prof. J D Barnes for providing access to the ozone fumigation facility in School of Biology, Newcastle University, UK. The authors would also like to thank the anonymous reviewers for their helpful comments toward improving this paper.
References (57)
J. Aguirre et al.
Reactive oxygen species and development in microbial eukaryotes
Trends in Microbiology
(2005)
L.R. Beuchat et al.
Evaluation of modified dichloran 18% glycerol (DG18) agar for enumerating fungi in wheat flour: a collaborative study
International Journal of Food Microbiology
(1996)
M.E. Guynot et al.
Combined effects of weak acid preservatives, pH and water activity on growth of Eurotium species on a sponge cake
International Journal of Food Microbiology
(2002)
M.A. Khadre et al.
Sporicidal action of ozone and hydrogen peroxide: a comparative study
International Journal of Food Microbiology
(2001)
F. Malagnac et al.
Two NADPH oxidase isoforms are required for sexual reproduction and ascospore germination in the filamentous fungus Podospora anserina
Fungal Genetics and Biology
(2004)
I. Morkunas et al.
Fusarium oxysporum-induced oxidative stress and antioxidative defenses of yellow lupine embryo axes with different sugar levels
Journal of Plant Physiology
(2008)
I. Morkunas et al.
Sucrose-induced lupine defense against Fusarium oxysporum: sucrose-stimulated accumulation of isoflavonoids as a defence response of lupine to Fusarium oxysporum
Plant Physiology and Biochemistry
(2005)
I. Morkunas et al.
Defense strategies of pea embryo axes with different levels of sucrose to Fusarium oxysporum and Ascochyta pisi
Physiological and Molecular Plant Pathology
(2008)
S. Munne-Bosch et al.
Drought-induced oxidative stress in strawberry tree (Arbutus unedo L.) growing in Mediterranean field conditions
Plant Science
(2004)
O. Ozkur et al.
Physiochemical and antioxidant responses of the perennial xerophyte Capparis ovata Desf. to drought
Environmental and Experimental Botany
(2009)
View more references
Cited by (13)
Antifungal activity of commercial sanitizers against strains of Penicillium roqueforti, Penicillium paneum, Hyphopichia burtonii, and Aspergillus pseudoglaucus: Bakery spoilage fungi
2019, Food Microbiology
Citation Excerpt :
In addition to the genus Penicillium and H. Burtonii, xerophilic species of Aspergillus, especially those with the Eurotium sexual form, are also worth mentioning in bread spoilage. Xerophilic fungi, such as A. pseudoglaucus (formerly E. repens), are commonly related to spoilage of low water activity products, including bread and bakery products (Antony-Babu and Singleton, 2011; Eicher and Ludwig, 2002; Tranquillini et al., 2017; Vytřasová et al., 2002). The different strains tested from the A. pseudoglaucus species (ER 04 and ER 05) were extremely resistant to the sanitizers.
Show abstract
Efficacy of gaseous ozone treatment on spore germination, growth and fumonisin production by Fusarium verticillioides invitro and in situ in maize
2014, Journal of Stored Products Research
Citation Excerpt :
This has been previously shown for F. verticillioides (Marin et al., 1999, 2004). The studies by Antony-Babu and Singleton (2009, 2011) made little reference to this effect. However, it is likely that the aw of their media was slightly affected by the addition of sucrose (Dallyn and Fox, 1980).
Show abstract
Opportunities and Challenges in the Application of Ozone in Food Processing
2014, Emerging Technologies for Food Processing
Show abstract
Antifungal Properties of Ozone Treatment against P. citrinum and R. stolonifera in Fresh-Peeled Garlic
2023, Coatings
Impacts of Gaseous Ozone (O<inf>3</inf>) on Germination, Mycelial Growth, and Aflatoxin B<inf>1</inf> Production In Vitro and In Situ Contamination of Stored Pistachio Nuts
2022, Toxins
The role of saccharides in the mechanisms of pathogenicity of fusarium oxysporum f. Sp. lupini in yellow lupine (lupinus luteus l.)
2020, International Journal of Molecular Sciences
View all citing articles on Scopus
☆
GenBank accession number related to the paper: GU808560.
View full text
Copyright © 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
Recommended articles
A non-toxigenic Aspergillus flavus strain prevents the spreading of and fumonisins in maize
Toxicon, Volume 181, 2020, pp. 6-8
T.A. Reis, …, B. Corrêa
Purification, structural characterization and bioactivity evaluation of a novel proteoglycan produced by
Carbohydrate Polymers, Volume 176, 2017, pp. 11-18
Jing-Kun Yan, …, Wu-Dan Cai
Monitoring the mycobiota of three plants manufacturing Culatello (a typical Italian meat product)
International Journal of Food Microbiology, Volume 203, 2015, pp. 78-85
Nicoletta Scaramuzza, …, Elettra Berni
Show 3 more articles
Article Metrics
Citations
Citation Indexes:
13
Captures
Readers:
36
View details
About ScienceDirect
Remote access
Shopping cart
Advertise
Contact and support
Terms and conditions
Privacy policy
Cookies are used by this site.
Cookie Settings
All content on this site: Copyright © 2024 Elsevier B.V., its licensors, and contributors. All rights are reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. For all open access content, the Creative Commons licensing terms apply.
We use cookies that are necessary to make our site work. We may also use additional cookies to analyze, improve, and personalize our content and your digital experience. For more information, see ourCookie Policy
Cookie Settings
Accept all cookies