化学试剂和助剂制造行业VOCs 排放成分谱及影响.
Source: Environmental Science & Technology (10036504) . 2024 Suppl, Vol. 47, p11-117. 7p.
Author(s): 王巧敏; 车祥; 陈曦; 何小红; 刘红; 潘妙婷; 江敏孜; 林长青
Abstract: Using SUMMA canisters and GC-MS technology, this study investigated the volatile organic compounds (VOCs) emitted by six chemical reagent and additive manufacturing companies in Shanghai. Emission quantities and factors were calculated, and the emission composition spectrum and ozone formation potential (OFP) were analyzed and evaluated. The results indicate that the basic components of VOCs in this industry were alkanes, aromatics, halogenated hydrocarbons, and oxygen-containing hydrocarbons (OVOCs), which account for more than 99.5% of total VOCs. The major characteristic pollutants include 2-methylpentane, 3-methylpentane, n-hexane, methylcyclopentane, tetrahydrofuran, acetone, ethylbenzene, and m/p-xylene. Alkanes, aromatics, and OVOCs were the primary photochemical reactive components, while tetrahydrofu-ran, 2-methylpentane, 3-methylpentane, 1,2,4-trimethylbenzene, and 1,2,3-trimethylbenzene were the main contributors to OFP. The source reactivity (SR) was within the average range of various industries. The study suggests that this industry should prioritize controlling emissions of C6-C8 alkanes, C8-C9 aromatics, and OVOCs, especially those with high ozone formation potential, to reduce their impact on the environment and human health.
(Chinese). (English) Copyright of Environmental Science & Technology (10036504) is the property of Editorial Board of Environmental Science & Technology and its content may not be copied or emailed to multiple sites or posted to a listserv without the copyright holder's express written permission. However, users may print, download, or email articles for individual use. This abstract may be abridged. No warranty is given about the accuracy of the copy. Users should refer to the original published version of the material for the full abstract.
For access to this entire article and additional high quality information, please check with your college/university library, local public library, or affiliated institution.
Important User Information: Remote access to EBSCO's databases is permitted to patrons of subscribing institutions accessing from remote locations for personal, non-commercial use. However, remote access to EBSCO's databases from non-subscribing institutions is not allowed if the purpose of the use is for commercial gain through cost reduction or avoidance for a non-subscribing institution.
Privacy Policy A/B Testing Terms of Use Copyright Cookie Policy
© 2024 EBSCO Industries, Inc. All rights reserved.