ACS ACS Publications C&EN CAS
Find my institution Log In
My Activity
Publications
Environmental Science & Technology LettersVol 11/Issue 7Article
Cite
Share
Jump to
Expand
OCCURRENCE, FATE, AND TRANSPORT OF CONTAMINANTS IN INDOOR AIR AND ATMOSPHEREJune 21, 2024
Nanocluster Aerosols from Ozone–Human Chemistry Are Dominated by Squalene–Ozone Reactions
Shen Yang*
Dusan Licina
Open PDF
Supporting Information (1)
Abstract
Nanocluster aerosols (NCAs, <3 nm particles) are associated with climate feedbacks and potentially with human health. Our recent study revealed NCA formation owing to the reaction of ozone with human surfaces. However, the underlying mechanisms driving NCA emissions remain unexplored. Squalene is the most abundant compound in human skin lipids that reacts with ozone, followed by unsaturated fatty acids. This study aims to examine the contribution of the squalene–ozone reaction to NCA formation and the influence of ozone and ammonia (NH3) levels. In a climate-controlled chamber, we painted squalene and 6-hexadecenoic acid (C16:1n6) on glass plates to facilitate their reactions with ozone. The squalene–ozone reaction was further investigated at different ozone levels (15 and 90 ppb) and NH3 levels (0 and 375 ppb). The results demonstrate that the ozonolysis of human skin lipid compounds contributes to NCA formation. With a typical squalene-C16:1n6 ratio found in human skin lipids (4:1), squalene generated 40 times more NCAs than did C16:1n6 and, thus, dominated NCA formation. More NCAs were generated with increased ozone levels, whereas increased NH3 levels were associated with the stronger generation of larger NCAs but fewer of the smallest ones. This study experimentally confirms that NCAs are primarily formed from squalene–ozone reactions in ozone–human chemistry.
This publication is licensed under
CC-BY 4.0 .
Copyright © 2024 The Authors. Published by American Chemical Society
Subjects
what are subjects
Anatomy
Atmospheric Chemistry
Lipids
Organic Reactions
Redox Reactions
Keywords
what are keywords
Ozone Chemistry
Ammonia
Human Skin Lipids
Particle Formation
Fatty Acid
Introduction
Nanocluster aerosol (NCA) particles represent airborne nanoparticles that are <3 nm in diameter. Originating from traffic emissions (1) and atmospheric processes, (2,3) NCAs constitute a considerable fraction of outdoor aerosols by number (4,5) and could become climatically relevant aerosol particles outdoors, depending on their physiochemical properties and atmospheric conditions. (6,7) Despite the unknown health effects of exposure to NCAs, concerns have been raised because of their ability to deeply penetrate the human lungs and even reach the brain. (8,9) In indoor environments where humans spend most of their time, (10) NCAs could dominate the total particle number. (11) Indoor NCAs could be transported from outdoors and generated from high-temperature processes (e.g., cooking and burning candles), (12,13) heated surfaces, (14,15) and ozone–terpene reactions. (16) Additionally, ozone–human chemistry represents an intriguing yet understudied source of indoor NCAs. Our previous studies were the first to report NCA formation via ozone–human chemistry (17) and ozone chemistry on worn clothing. (18) Moreover, our recent study showed that the NCAs formed during ozone–human chemistry can grow into ultrafine particles ranging from 10 to 55 nm, depending on ventilation and indoor air movement. (19) Nevertheless, the driving mechanisms of ozone–human chemistry generating NCAs remain unexplored. A fundamental question yet to be addressed is which constituent of human skin lipids plays the most significant role in NCA formation in the presence of ozone.
Human skin lipids contain both saturated and unsaturated compounds; the latter react with ozone more rapidly. (20,21) Among these, squalene is the most abundant compound in human skin lipids that readily reacts with ozone, followed by unsaturated fatty acids. (22−24) Although extensive research has been dedicated to studying the gas-phase products resulting from the reaction of ozone with squalene and fatty acids, (22−33) our understanding of particle formation by these reactions remains limited. Previous studies reported the formation of >10 nm secondary organic aerosols (SOAs) resulting from the reaction of ozone with surface-sorbed squalene. (34,35) However, these studies have not delved into the NCA size range or explored the relative contribution of squalene and unsaturated fatty acids to NCA formation in the presence of ozone. In addition, our previous study revealed the dependence of NCA emissions on factors such as human age, clothing coverage, and air temperature and humidity but overlooked the potential influence of the ozone level. (17)
In addition, humans are a potent source of ammonia (NH3), (36) which is known as an important player in atmospheric particle formation. (37−39) It was previously presumed that human-emitted NH3 may play a role in NCA formation during the ozone–human reaction, (17) a hypothesis that merits further investigation.
In view of these knowledge gaps, this study reports, for the first time, the formation of NCAs resulting from the squalene–ozone reaction. In a climate-controlled chamber, we measured NCAs generated from ozone’s reaction with surface-sorbed squalene and compared them with those resulting from the reaction of ozone with 6-hexadecenoic acid (C16:1n6), one of the most abundant unsaturated fatty acids in human skin lipids. We investigated the influence of ozone and NH3 levels on the generation of NCAs from squalene–ozone reactions. The results hold the potential to contribute to a deeper understanding of the mechanisms driving human-derived NCA generation and the effect of ozone chemistry on indoor NCA levels.
Methods and Materials
Experimental Procedure and Design
We performed experiments in a 1.9 m3 stainless-steel climate chamber (detailed in Section S1 and Figure S1). Reactants (squalene or C16:1n6) painted on a 0.24 m2 glass plate were exposed to ozone to investigate NCA formation. A typical human surface has an area of 1.8 m2. The reactive surface:volume ratio (0.24 m2/1.9 m3 = 0.13 m–1) corresponded to one person per 14 m3, which is commonly found indoors. (40) A specific quantity of pure squalene (purity of >99%, Acros Organics, Thermo Fisher Scientific) or pure C16:1n6 (purity of >99%, Cayman) was dissolved in 10 mL of methanol, and then the mixture evenly painted on a glass plate using a glass stick. The painted glass plate was then placed on the stand inside the chamber. After the chamber door was closed, the chamber was ventilated with filtered air at an air change rate of 3 h–1 for 45 min to reduce the background contamination and then at a rate of 1 h–1 for an additional 45 min to stabilize the experimental conditions. Ozone was subsequently injected into the chamber to initiate the reaction at an air change rate of 1 h–1. After a reaction period of either 3 or 6 h, the glass plate was removed from the chamber and the measurement continued for an additional 20 min to capture the NCA decay. The full experimental procedure is visually detailed in Figure S3.
Table S1 lists the three experimental conditions investigated in this study. In experiments A comparing the reactions of ozone with squalene and C16:1n6, we applied 20 mg of squalene (equivalent to 83 mg/m2) and 5 mg of fatty acid (equivalent to 21 mg/m2) as reactants, respectively. The quantities were within the range detected on human skin. Each reaction lasted for 3 h with a steady-state ozone level of ∼60 ppb. In experiments B exploring the influence of the ozone level, 750 mg of squalene reacted with 90 ppb ozone for 3 h, followed by an additional 3 h period with 15 ppb ozone (in total 6 h). In experiments C, we studied a 3 h ozone reaction at 30 ppb without NH3, followed by an additional 3 h with ozone at 30 ppb and NH3 at 375 ppb, which approximates the NH3 levels inside the chamber occupied by an adult. (36) In experiments B and C, the amount of squalene was increased to correspond to the typical total amount found in human skin lipids.
Instrumentation and Quality Control
NCAs in the size range of 1.2–2.8 nm were sampled at a flow rate of 2.5 L/min and measured in real time at 2 min time intervals with a Nano Condensation Nucleus Counter (Airmodus A11 nCNC System, Airmodus). The principle of the measurement has been described in previous studies (17,41,42) and in Section S2. The instrument was positioned immediately outside the chamber, and to minimize the particle sampling losses, we sampled NCAs with a core sampling probe at a carrier flow of 5 L/min. (43)
The ozone concentration inside the chamber was measured with a time resolution of 1 min with an ozone monitor (model 724, Tanabyte) at a sampling flow rate of 2.0 L/min. The level of NH3 was monitored at 30 s time intervals with a sampling flow rate of 140 mL/min using an NH3 analyzer (LSE NH3-1700, LSE Monitors). The air temperature and relative humidity (RH) were recorded using a HOBO UX90 sensor (Onset Inc.).
Before the experimental campaign, all instruments underwent full service and calibration. Due to limited resources, each experiment had one replicate, with variations typically falling within 20%, demonstrating the robust reproducibility of the results (Table S1).
Data Analysis
Real-time NCA concentrations were derived through the inversion of raw data by the stepwise method (44) using four size bins (1.2–1.5, 1.5–1.7, 1.7–1.9, and 1.9–2.8 nm). The average rate of emission of NCAs was obtained using the material-balance equation:
E¯i=V(α+βi)N¯i
(1)
where N̅i (cm–3) is the steady-state particle number concentration for particle size i, E̅i (particles per hour) is the particle number emission rate per hour for particle size i, V (V (cm3) is the chamber volume, α (h-1) is the air change rate, and βi (h−1) is the particle deposition rate obtained via exponential fitting of the particle number concentration during the decay period after each experiment. Because of the relatively low particle concentration inside the chamber, we neglected the coagulation sink in the calculation.
Results and Discussion
Comparing the Reactions of Ozone with Squalene and Fatty Acid
Figure 1 shows the time series of the ozone mixing ratio and NCA size distribution in experiments comparing the reactions of ozone with squalene and fatty acid C16:1n6. After ozone was injected into the chamber, the NCA levels in both reaction experiments started to increase. This finding supports the inference from our previous study that ozonolysis of human skin lipid compounds contributes to NCA formation. (17) Although the steady-state ozone levels were similar in both experiments (55 and 56 ppb), the steady-state NCA levels were 40 times higher during ozonolysis of squalene relative to that of C16:1n6, indicating that squalene plays a dominant role in NCA formation when ozone reacts with human skin lipids. The size distributions of NCAs further demonstrated the disparity between the two reactions. The squalene–ozone reaction generated an abundant concentration of NCAs in the smallest size range (1.2–1.5 nm), which subsequently grew. In comparison, the ozonolysis of C16:1n6 emitted a much lower level of the smallest NCA, with no obvious signals detected for >1.7 nm NCAs (see also Table S1).
Figure 1
Figure 1. Time series of total NCA number concentration (1.2–2.8 nm) and ozone (top) and size-resolved NCA concentration (bottom) in experiments comparing the reactions of ozone with (A) squalene and (B) fatty acid C16:1n6. The upside-down triangle represents the moment at which ozone was injected into the chamber. Dp is the activation diameter determined by the nCNC instrument (detailed in Section S2). The data are from a single experiment from experiments A, whereas the replicate showed good reproducibility (Table S1 and Figure S4).
The reaction between ozone and C16:1n6 mainly produces gas-phase decanal and C6H10O3, with the latter potentially contributing to NCA formation via nucleation due to its low volatility. (22,23) In comparison, the squalene–ozone reaction is notably more complex due to the presence of multiple unsaturated C═C bonds in squalene. (22,24,25) In addition to generating gases such as acetone and 6-MHO, (22,23) the squalene–ozone reaction can also produce low-volatility compounds that may nucleate, thereby forming NCAs. Squalene is mostly surface-sorbed indoors. Hence, the reaction of ozone with squalene vapors is negligible relative to surface chemistry. (22) Previous studies examined surface-bound chemicals formed after the reaction of ozone with surface-sorbed pure squalene, including but not limited to 6-MHO, 4-OPA, geranylacetone, C17-trienal, secondary ozonides, and succinic acid. (25,45−49) These low-volatility compounds are expected to contribute to NCA formation. In addition, Criegee intermediates formed during ozonolysis of squalene have the potential to propagate chain reactions in the autoxidation of unsaturated lipids, which is linked with NCA formation. (50,51)
Influence of the Ozone Level
The NCAs generated by the squalene–ozone reaction were strongly influenced by the ozone level, as illustrated in Figure 2A. The NCA level inside the chamber reached 1.4 × 104 cm–3 at a steady-state