Submit Article
Log in
Register
This journal
Journals
Publish
Clinical
Global health
Multimedia
Events
About
Advanced search
CORRESPONDENCE| VOLUME 35, 100807, JULY 2024
Download Full Issue
PDF [161 KB]
Save
Share
Reprints
Request
Medical use of adjunct oxygen-ozone therapy and its impact on the scientific literature to date
Salvatore Chirumbolo
Luigi Valdenassi
Sergio Pandolfi
Umberto Tirelli
Marianno Franzini
Open AccessPublished:June 07, 2024DOI:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.lana.2024.100807
Contributors
Declaration of interests
References
Article info
Linked Articles
In his recent comment on this journal, Hesley Machado Silva reported criticism about the use of ozone in medicine. He exhibited an outcry against Lula’s Government approval of ozone therapy, since Bolsonaro’s policy to push forward a purported official science denialism, went ahead even with current politicians in Brazil, according to the author.1
Aside from the angry allegations against more recent Brazilian Presidents and their Governments, with their unpopular decisions on public health, we are particularly puzzled about the terms denialism and pseudoscience the author adopted and who referred, directly or indirectly, to ozone therapy.1
In our opinion it is dumbfounding that a leading journal such as The Lancet offers the scenery to a raw political rally, rather than to a properly documented commentary on a scientific issue. Ozone therapy is not an exclusive matter of internet and social network, as reported by the author in his Comment.1
Leading impacted journals hosted many experimental papers about ozone therapy. Although Machado Silva’s comment seems to be restricted to Brazil, many European countries (e.g., Russia, Germany, Spain) widely use oxygen-ozone therapy in medical practice and in Italy, some Regions (for example Lombardy) included ozone therapy within the NIH Essential Assistance Levels (LEA), whereas numerous clinicians and healthcare workers, seriously engaged in this field, participated and attended the Sixth International Congress on Oxygen-Ozone Therapy, promoted and organized by the Scientific Society of Oxygen Ozone Therapy (SIOOT), which was held in Rome the recent May 16th–18th 2024. The number of papers about ozone therapy published by Brazilian academies is 154 of 4637 (source: PubMed), about 3.32%, representing a negligible part of the “ozone therapy” topic in the scientific community worldwide. Furthermore, 49 meta-analyses, 86 systematic reviews, 242 RCTs, and 30 observational studies, have been published in the official Data Warehouses of scientific impacted publications (source: PubMed), not on social networks alone. Homotherapy is not a correct term, physicians refer to auto-hemotherapy. Several scientific reports about the use of ozone in COVID-19 were published in impacted journals with Q1 cite score (source: Scopus).
Ozone therapy is widely applied because it targets symptoms shared by most of immune chronic pathologies, never because it is a “universal panacea”, as reported.1
Oxygen-ozone therapy proved sound efficacy (here is a list of only a few examples) in COVID-19,2
ME/CFS,3
post-COVID,4
aphthous stomatitis,5
antimicrobial therapy,6
low back pain,7
fibromyalgia,8
,9
multiple sclerosis,10
and much more. We gently invite the author to check for the Scopus journal rank quality (according to cite score) of the journals hosting these examples.
We thank the author for giving us the possibility to shed light on this medical practice and its wide representation within the official scientific community.
Contributors
Conceptualization: SC, MF, LV; Data curation: SP; Formal Analysis: SC, LV; Funding acquisition: not applicable, Investigation: MF, SC, Methodology: MF, UT, LV; Project administration: MF; Resources: SP, SC; Software: SP; Supervision: MF, LV, UT; Validation: SC, MF, LV, SP, UT; Visualization: MF, LV; Writing—original draft: SC, MF; Writing—review & editing: MF, LV, SC.
Declaration of interests
We declare no competing interests.
References
1.Machado Silva H.
The ozone therapy controversy and the need for science-based health policies in the Brazilian context.
Lancet Reg Health Am. 2024; 34100745
View in Article
PubMed
Google Scholar
2.Franzini M. Valdenassi L. Ricevuti G. et al.
Oxygen-ozone (O2-O3) immunoceutical therapy for patients with COVID-19. Preliminary evidence reported.
Int Immunopharmacol. 2020; 88106879
View in Article
Scopus (50)
PubMed
Crossref
Google Scholar
3.Tirelli U. Franzini M. Valdenassi L. et al.
Patients with myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome (ME/CFS) greatly improved fatigue symptoms when treated with oxygen-ozone autohemotherapy.
J Clin Med. 2021; 11: 29
View in Article
Scopus (10)
PubMed
Crossref
Google Scholar
4.Tirelli U. Franzini M. Valdenassi L. et al.
Fatigue in post-acute sequelae of SARS-CoV2 (PASC) treated with oxygen-ozone autohemotherapy - preliminary results on 100 patients.
Eur Rev Med Pharmacol Sci. 2021; 25: 5871-5875
View in Article
PubMed
Google Scholar
5.Al-Omiri M.K. Alhijawi M. AlZarea B.K. Abul Hassan R.S. Lynch E.
Ozone treatment of recurrent aphthous stomatitis: a double blinded study.
Sci Rep. 2016; 627772
View in Article
Scopus (21)
PubMed
Crossref
Google Scholar
6.Roth A. Maruthamuthu M.K. Nejati S. et al.
Wearable adjunct ozone and antibiotic therapy system for treatment of Gram-negative dermal bacterial infection.
Sci Rep. 2022; 1213927
View in Article
Scopus (11)
Crossref
Google Scholar
7.Paoloni M. Di Sante L. Cacchio A. et al.
Intramuscular oxygen-ozone therapy in the treatment of acute back pain with lumbar disc herniation: a multicenter, randomized, double-blind, clinical trial of active and simulated lumbar paravertebral injection.
Spine (Phila Pa 1976). 2009; 34: 1337-1344
View in Article
Scopus (105)
PubMed
Crossref
Google Scholar
8.Sucuoğlu H. Soydaş N.
Efficacy of ozone therapy as an add-on treatment in fibromyalgia: a randomized double-blind placebo-controlled study.
J Back Musculoskelet Rehabil. 2023; 36: 357-366
View in Article
Scopus (2)
PubMed
Crossref
Google Scholar
9.Tirelli U. Franzini M. Valdenassi L. Pandolfi S. Taibi R. Chirumbolo S.
Fibromyalgia treated with oxygen-ozone auto-haemotherapy (O2-O3-AHT): a case study on 200 patients with a modified 10-PI-NRS evaluation.
Eur Rev Med Pharmacol Sci. 2022; 26: 7974-7979
View in Article
PubMed
Google Scholar
10.Delgado-Roche L. Riera-Romo M. Mesta F. et al.
Medical ozone promotes Nrf2 phosphorylation reducing oxidative stress and pro-inflammatory cytokines in multiple sclerosis patients.
Eur J Pharmacol. 2017; 811: 148-154
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejphar.2017.06.017
View in Article
Scopus (65)
PubMed
Crossref
Google Scholar
Article info
Publication history
Published: June 07, 2024
Accepted: May 27, 2024
Received in revised form: May 20, 2024
Received: May 4, 2024
Identification
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.lana.2024.100807
Copyright
© 2024 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Ltd.
User license
Creative Commons Attribution – NonCommercial – NoDerivs (CC BY-NC-ND 4.0) | How you can reuse

ScienceDirect
Access this article on ScienceDirect
Linked Articles
The presence of the adjunct ozone therapy in the scientific official literature worldwide should suggest that this medical approach is neither denialism, nor pseudoscience: author's response to Chirumbolo et al.
Full-Text
PDF
Open Access
LANCET JOURNALS
The Lancet
The Lancet Child & Adolescent Health
The Lancet Diabetes & Endocrinology
The Lancet Digital Health
The Lancet Gastroenterology & Hepatology
The Lancet Global Health
The Lancet Haematology
The Lancet Healthy Longevity
The Lancet HIV
The Lancet Infectious Diseases
The Lancet Microbe
The Lancet Neurology
The Lancet Oncology
The Lancet Planetary Health
The Lancet Psychiatry
The Lancet Public Health
The Lancet Regional Health – Americas
The Lancet Regional Health – Europe
The Lancet Regional Health – Southeast Asia
The Lancet Regional Health – Western Pacific
The Lancet Respiratory Medicine
The Lancet Rheumatology
eBioMedicine
eClinicalMedicine
CLINICAL INITIATIVES
The Lancet Clinic
Commissions
Series
Picture Quiz
GLOBAL HEALTH INITIATIVES
Global Health Hub
Commissions
Series
Global Burden of Disease
Climate Countdown
MULTIMEDIA
Infographics
Podcasts
Videos
INFORMATION
About us
For authors
For advertisers
For press
Statement on offensive historical content
Open access
Publishing excellence
Community guidelines
Peer review
Preprints
ACCESS
Access our content
Personal subscriptions
Existing print subscribers
Request institutional access
Research4Life
CONNECT
Lancet Alerts
Lancet Webinars
Contact us
Customer service
Our global team
Conferences
The content on this site is intended for science and health care professionals.

We use cookies to help provide and enhance our service and tailor content and ads. To update your cookie settings, please visit the Cookie Settings for this site.
All content on this site: Copyright © 2024 Elsevier Ltd., its licensors, and contributors.
All rights are reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies.
For all open access content, the Creative Commons licensing terms apply.

Privacy Policy   Terms and Conditions   Accessibility

We use cookies that are necessary to make our site work. We may also use additional cookies to analyze, improve, and personalize our content and your digital experience. For more information, see ourCookie Policy
Cookie Settings
Accept all cookies