Home Announcements Current Submissions Archives About
Search
Register Login
Home / Archives / Vol. 1 No. 2 (Juli 2024) / Articles
Analisis Pembentukan Perjanjian Internasional untuk Menangani Krisis Penipisan Ozon akibat Emisi Orbital Spacecraft
Brigitta Caecilia Putri Noya
Fakultas Hukum Universitas Brawijaya
Agis Ardhiansyah
Fakultas Hukum Universitas Brawijaya
Dony Aditya Prasetyo
Fakultas Hukum Universitas Brawijaya
Keywords: Emission of Orbital Spacecraft, Formation of International Agreements, Ozone Depletion
Abstract
This research aims to establish the regulatory framework for emissions generated by orbital spacecraft within the scope of international law, particularly space law and international environmental law, and to formulate a new international agreement that can address the emissions issues arising from orbital spacecraft. In analyzing these issues, the author employs a normative legal method, utilizing legislative and conceptual approaches. The Outer Space Treaty, as the primary agreement regulating all activities in outer space, proves inadequate in addressing the existing problems. Article IX, considered the closest provision to addressing the issue of orbital spacecraft emissions, still falls short and fails to provide a comprehensive solution. The Montreal Protocol, as the principal agreement related to compounds potentially causing ozone depletion, also falls short in evaluating the threat posed by orbital spacecraft emissions due to the limited coverage of regulatory jurisdiction. The regulatory vacuum concerning the impact of orbital spacecraft emissions on ozone depletion needs to be promptly addressed through the creation of a new international agreement. The formation of such an agreement should adhere to existing systematic structures, and the substance of the new agreement must be able to accommodate on-the-ground issues while maintaining an environmental perspective.
References
A. Umar S., dan Tasduq S., Ozone Layer Depletion and Emerging Public Health Concerns - An Update on Epidemiological Perspective of the Ambivalent Effects of Ultraviolet Radiation Exposure. Front Oncol. Vol 4. 2022.
Cameron, James dan Jacob D. Werksman, The Precautionary Principle: A Policy For Action In The Face Of Uncertainty 1, Centre for International Environmental Law, London, 1991.
Christopher Greenwood, Source of International law: an Introduction, United Nation, https://legal.un.org/avl/pdf/ls/Greenwood_outline.pdf (diakses 1 Oktober 2023)
Cologne Commentary on Outer Space Law
D. Bodansky, J. Brunee, L. Rajamani, International Climate Change Law 1stEd., Oxford University Press, Oxford, 2017.
Declaration of the United Nations Conference on the Human Environment 1972
Jeff Foust. The new era of private human orbital spaceflight. The Space Review. https://www.thespacereview.com/article/4137/1 (diakses 20 Juli 2023).
Jr.,Glenn JH, Summary results of the first United States manned orbital space flight. Life Sci Space Res. Volume 1,1963.
Kolossov, Y.M., Legal Aspects of Outer Space Environmental Protection, Proceedings of the Twenty-Third Colloquium on the Law of Outer Space, 1980, pp. 103 – 106.
Larson, E.J.L., R.W. Portmann, K.H. Rosenlof, D.W. Fahey, J.S. Daniel, and M.N. Ross. Global atmospheric response to emissions from a proposed reusable space launch system, Earths Future, 5(1), 2017. Laura Revell, dkk. A Rapidly growng rocket industry could undo decades of work to save the ozone layer -unless we act now, the conversation.com, https://theconversation.com/a-rapidly-growing-rocket-industry-could-undo-decades-of-work-to-save-the-ozone-layer-unless-we-act-now-198982 (diakses 20 Juli 2023).
Lee, W.R., D.G. MacMartin, D. Visioni, and B. Kravitz, High-Latitude Stratospheric Aerosol Geoengineering Can Be More Effective if Injection Is Limited to Spring, Geophys. Res. Lett., 48, 2021.
Letter from the Permanent Representative of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics addressed to the Secretary General, UN Doc A/AC.105/15 (1963)
Miraux, L., Environmental limits to the space sector’s growth, Sci. Tot. Environ., Vol.806, 2022.
Muhaimin, Metode Penelitian Hukum, Penerbit UPT Mataram University Press, Mataram, 2020.
Report of the Ad Hoc Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space , UN Doc A/4141 (1959)
Rio Declaration on Environment and Development 1992
Ross, Martin, Darin Toohey, Manfred Peinemann & Patrick Ross. Limits on the Space Launch Market Related to Stratospheric Ozone Depletion, Astropolitics, Volume 7, 2009.
Simmons,F., Rocket Exhaust Plume Phenomenology, The Aerospace Press, California, 2001.
Statue of the International Court of Justice
Til,Nic Van. The Commercialization of Outer Space. Honors Project, 2013.
Treaty on Principles Governing the Activities of States in the Exploration and Use of Outer Space, including the Moon and Other Celestial Bodies 1967
Published
2024-07-15
How to Cite
Noya, B. C. P., Ardhiansyah, A., & Prasetyo, D. A. (2024). Analisis Pembentukan Perjanjian Internasional untuk Menangani Krisis Penipisan Ozon akibat Emisi Orbital Spacecraft . RechtJiva, 1(2). Retrieved from https://rechtjiva.ub.ac.id/index.php/rechtjiva/article/view/67
More Citation Formats
Issue
Vol. 1 No. 2 (Juli 2024)
Section
Articles
Information for Author
Author Guidelines
Template
Surat Pernyataan Publikasi Artikel
Contact Us
Publication
Editorial Team
Reviewers
Peer Review Process
Focus and Scope
Publication Ethics
Copyright Notice
Open Journal Systems
Current Issue
RechtJiva
E-ISSN: 3047-3721
Email: rechtjiva@ub.ac.id
Faculty of Law, Brawijaya University
Jl. MT Haryono 169 Malang, East Java , Indonesia