Advertisement
Journals
Books
Sign in through your institution
Issues
More Content
Submit
Purchase
Alerts
About
American Journal of Epidemiology
Public Health and Epidemiology
Books
Journals
Oxford Academic
Advanced Search
JOURNAL ARTICLE ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
Comparing traditional and causal inference methodologies for evaluating impacts of long-term air pollution exposure on hospitalization with Alzheimer's disease and related dementias Get access
Michelle Miao Qin,
Naeem Khoshnevis,
Francesca Dominici,
Danielle Braun,
Antonella Zanobetti,
Daniel Mork
American Journal of Epidemiology, kwae133, https://doi.org/10.1093/aje/kwae133
Published: 21 June 2024 Article history
Cite
Permissions
Share
Abstract
Alzheimer’s disease and related dementias (ADRD) present a growing public health burden in the United States. One actionable risk factor for ADRD is air pollution: multiple studies have found associations between air pollution and exacerbation of ADRD. Our study builds on previous studies by applying modern statistical causal inference methodologies—generalized propensity score (GPS) weighting and matching—on a large, longitudinal dataset. We follow 50 million Medicare enrollees to investigate impacts of three air pollutants—fine particular matter (PM
2.5
⁠), nitrogen dioxide (NO
2
⁠), and summer ozone (O
3
⁠)—on elderly patients’ rate of first hospitalization with ADRD diagnosis. Similar to previous studies using traditional statistical models, our results found increased hospitalization risks due to increased PM
2.5
and NO
2
exposure, with less conclusive results for O
3
⁠. In particular, our GPS weighting analysis finds IQR increases in PM
2.5
⁠, NO
2
⁠, or O
3
exposure results in hazard ratios of 1.108 (95% CI: 1.097-1.119), 1.058 (1.049-1.067), or 1.045 (1.036-1.054), respectively. GPS matching results are similar for PM
2.5
and NO
2
with attenuated effects for O
3
⁠. Our results strengthen arguments that long-term PM
2.5
and NO
2
exposure increases risk of hospitalization with ADRD diagnosis. Additionally, we highlight strengths and limitations of causal inference methodologies in observational studies with continuous treatments. Keywords: Alzheimer’s disease and related dementias, air pollution, Medicare, causal inference, generalized propensity score.
Alzheimer's disease and related dementias, air pollution, Medicare, causal inference, generalized propensity score
Accepted manuscripts
Accepted manuscripts are PDF versions of the author’s final manuscript, as accepted for publication by the journal but prior to copyediting or typesetting. They can be cited using the author(s), article title, journal title, year of online publication, and DOI. They will be replaced by the final typeset articles, which may therefore contain changes. The DOI will remain the same throughout.
This content is only available as a PDF.
© The Author(s) 2024. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health. All rights reserved. For permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com
This article is published and distributed under the terms of the Oxford University Press, Standard Journals Publication Model (https://academic.oup.com/journals/pages/open_access/funder_policies/chorus/standard_publication_model)
You do not currently have access to this article.
Sign in
Get help with access
Society for Epidemiologic Research members
Sign in through society site
Personal account
Sign in with email/username & password
Get email alerts
Save searches
Purchase content
Activate your purchase/trial code
Add your ORCID iD
Sign in
Register
Institutional access
Sign in through your institution
Sign in with a library card
Sign in with username/password
Recommend to your librarian
Institutional account management
Sign in as administrator
Purchase
Subscription prices and ordering for this journal
Purchasing options for books and journals across Oxford Academic
Short-term Access
To purchase short-term access, please sign in to your personal account above.
Don't already have a personal account? Register
Comparing traditional and causal inference methodologies for evaluating impacts of long-term air pollution exposure on hospitalization with Alzheimer's disease and related dementias - 24 Hours access
EUR €38.00 GBP £33.00 USD $41.00
Advertisement
CITATIONS
0
VIEWS
50
ALTMETRIC
More metrics information
Email alerts
Article activity alert
Advance article alerts
New issue alert
Receive exclusive offers and updates from Oxford Academic
Recommended
TWO AUTHORS REPLY
Yaguang Wei et al., American Journal of Epidemiology, 2020
Hospice Use, Hospitalization, and Medicare Spending at the End of Life
Rachael Zuckerman et al., The Journals of Gerontology: Series B, 2016
Decomposition of Disparities in Alzheimer’s Disease and Related Dementia
Igor Akushevich, Innov Aging, 2021
Associations between air pollution and mental health service use in dementia: a retrospective cohort study
Amy Ronaldson et al., Evid Based Ment Health, 2023
Associations between long term air pollution exposure and first hospital admission for kidney and total urinary system diseases in the US Medicare population: nationwide longitudinal cohort study
Whanhee Lee et al., BMJ Medicine, 2022
OP152 The impact of air pollution on GP visits and hospital admissions by ethnicity in the United Kingdom: A longitudinal spatial-temporal analysis
Mary Abed Al Ahad, J Epidemiol Community Health, 2023
I consent to the use of Google Analytics and related cookies across the TrendMD network (widget, website, blog). For more information, see our Privacy Settings and Terms of Use.
Yes No
Citing articles via
Google Scholar
Latest
Most Read
Most Cited
Confounder selection in firearm policy research: A scoping review
Systematic reviews of the literature: an introduction to current methods
Invited commentary: five hundred twenty-five thousand, six hundred calories, how do you measure diet in a year?
Quantifying work-related social inequalities in life expectancy: a methodological proof-of-concept
Racialized experience, biomarkers of lead exposure, and later-life cognition: a mediation analysis
More from Oxford Academic
Medicine and Health
Public Health and Epidemiology
Books
Journals
Looking for your next opportunity?
General Pediatrician, RCPSC Specialist
Brockville, Ontario
State Epidemiologist
Lincoln, Nebraska
ACADEMIC HEMATOPATHOLOGIST
Pittsburg, Pennsylvania
Transplant Infectious Diseases Specialist
Long Island, New York
View all jobs
About American Journal of Epidemiology
Editorial Board
Author Guidelines
Facebook
Twitter
LinkedIn
Purchase
Recommend to your Library
Advertising and Corporate Services
Journals Career Network
Online ISSN 1476-6256 Print ISSN 0002-9262 Copyright © 2024 Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health
About Oxford Academic
Publish journals with us
University press partners
What we publish
New features 
Authoring
Open access
Purchasing
Institutional account management
Rights and permissions
Get help with access
Accessibility
Contact us
Advertising
Media enquiries
Oxford University Press
News
Oxford Languages
University of Oxford
Oxford University Press is a department of the University of Oxford. It furthers the University's objective of excellence in research, scholarship, and education by publishing worldwide
Copyright © 2024 Oxford University Press Cookie settings Cookie policy Privacy policy Legal notice
Oxford University Press uses cookies to enhance your experience on our website. By selecting ‘accept all’ you are agreeing to our use of cookies. You can change your cookie settings at any time. More information can be found in our Cookie Policy.
Reject and manage
Accept all