Journals & Books
Help
Search
My account
Sign in
Access through your institution
Purchase PDF
Article preview
Abstract
Introduction
Section snippets
References (49)
Cited by (22)
Science of The Total Environment
Volume 627
, 15 June 2018, Pages 997-1007
Shelf life extension as solution for environmental impact mitigation: A case study for bakery products
Author links open overlay panel
Jacopo Bacenetti a
,
Alessia Cavaliere a
,
Giacomo Falcone b
,
Valentina Giovenzana c
,
Alessandro Banterle a
,
Riccardo Guidetti c
Show more
Add to Mendeley
Share
Cite
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2018.01.301
Get rights and content
Highlights
•
Shelf life extension (SLE) can reduce food losses and food environmental impacts.
•
The environmental load of whole-wheat breadstick with extended shelf life was assessed.
•
Life cycle assessment approach was applied from a “cradle-to- grave” perspective.
•
Shelf life extension is not always a proper mitigation solution.
•
SLE's effectiveness depends on the magnitude of product loss reduction that is achieved.
Abstract
Over the last years, increasing attention has been paid to environmental concerns related to food production and potential solutions to this issue. Among the different strategies being considered to reduce the impact food production has on the environment, only moderate has been paid to the extension of shelf life; a longer shelf life can reduce food losses as well as the economic and environmental impacts of the distribution logistics.
The aim of this study is to assess the environmental performance of whole-wheat breadsticks with extended shelf lives and to evaluate whether the shelf-life extension is an effective mitigation solution from an environmental point of view. To this purpose, the life cycle assessment (LCA) approach was applied from a “cradle-to-grave” perspective. Rosmarinic acid was used as an antioxidant to extend the shelf life.
To test the robustness of the results and to investigate the influence of the choices made in the modelling phase, a sensitivity and uncertainty analysis were carried out.
The achieved results highlighted how, for 10 of the 12 evaluated impact categories, the shelf-life extension is a proper mitigation solution, and its effectiveness depends on the magnitude of product loss reduction that is achieved. The shelf-life extension doesn't allow for the reduction of environmental impact in the categories of human toxicity, cancer effects and freshwater eutrophication.
Graphical abstract
Download: Download high-res image (334KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Introduction
Food production and consumption are responsible for remarkable negative effects on the environment (Holt et al., 2016). Previous studies estimated that the agri-food system impacts the environment considerably, accounting for almost 70% of freshwater and 20% of energy use, and contributing dramatically to greenhouse gas emissions and land use (Aiking, 2011; Perignon et al., 2017, Lamastra et al., 2017). Over the years, consumer awareness about this issue has grown, and the demand for “environmentally friendly” food has increased (Galli et al., 2017). Several studies show that consumers are quite aware of environmental sustainability and its relation to their food choices. More in detail, Flash Eurobarometer 367 (European Commission, 2013) reports that 84% of EU27 citizens declare that the environmental impact of a product is for them ‘very’ (38%) or ‘fairly important’ (46%) when choosing which products to buy. Indeed, 26% of the respondents declared that they ‘often’ buy environmentally friendly products, while 54% declared to do so ‘sometimes’. Moreover, 89% of the Eurobarometer respondents declared to ‘strongly’ (50%) or ‘tend to agree’ (39%) that ‘buying environmentally friendly products can make a real difference to the environment’. Moreover, many respondents believed that the following personal actions related to food have ‘the greatest impact on solving environmental problems in their countries’: recycling and minimising waste (54% of respondents); buying local agricultural products (35%); making efforts to use less water (31%); buying products by eco-friendly producers (23%) (European Commission 2013).
Over the last years, guidelines and studies for the reduction of negative environmental consequences due to food production were developed (De Luca et al., 2017, Corrado et al., 2017). Further detailed attention has been paid to this environmental concern and its solutions (e.g., by reducing the energy consumed during food processing, by valorising the by-products and wastes) (Kummu et al., 2012; Beretta et al., 2013; Mo et al., 2018). A recent EU Project (Stenmarck et al., 2016) stated that 89 million tonnes of food is wasted per year, and the projection of food waste for 2020 could lead to a 40% increase. What is definitely clear is that food losses occur throughout the entire food system, from households (42%), manufacturers (39%), retail (5%), and catering (14%) (Kosseva and Webb, 2013). According to Gustavsson et al. (2011), about 45% of fruit and vegetable products, 30% of cereal products, 20% of dairy products, 20% of oilseed and legume are lost each year. In September 2015, the EU and Member States committed to meeting the Sustainable Development Goals (SDG) (EU, 2016), including a target to halve per capita food waste at the retail and consumer levels by 2030 and reduce food losses along the food production and supply chains. The reduction of food losses will involve considerable environmental benefits. In this regard, among the different strategies that can be implemented, (e.g., improvement of storage techniques, optimization of the distribution logistic, etc.), only little attention has been paid to the extension of shelf life. The shelf life is the period of time that corresponds, in proper storage conditions, to a tolerable decrease in the quality of a packaged food (UNI 10534, 1995). The shelf life of a product does not necessarily relate to its real life, which ends with the loss of the hygienic and/or nutritional properties, but generally corresponds to the end of its marketability in terms of an unacceptable worsening of its particular physical and sensory features (Cavaliere and Ventura, 2018). Falcone et al. (2017) evaluated the environmental and economic benefits of the shelf-life extension of mozzarella cheese, considering different governing liquids (namely the saline and slightly acidic solution in which mozzarella is stored). Gutierrez et al. (2017) evaluated the environmental benefits related to shelf-life extension for cheesecake. Considering different packaging, Calligaris et al. (2007) developed a shelf-life prediction model of lipid-containing biscuits, while Bravin et al. (2006) studied an edible coating to extend the shelf life of dry bakery products.
From the consumer's perspective, the positive impact of shelf-life extended products relies on improved convenience attributes, such as less time spent shopping and cooking. Moreover, the longer shelf-life period should increase the consumer's ability to manage food provision, storage, and preparation and, consequently, minimize domestic food waste (Amani and Gadde, 2015; Falcone et al., 2017; Spada et al., 2018; Williams and Wikström, 2011).
In fact, a longer shelf life can reduce food losses as well as the economic and environmental impacts of the distribution logistics. As pointed out by Alamprese et al. (2017), shelf life extension can be achieved by acting at different levels: on formulation, processing conditions, packaging and storage conditions both during distribution, sale and household use.
For bakery products, the main causes of quality decay are related to crunchiness loss and lipid oxidation. Lipid oxidation is undoubtedly the major cause of quality losses of low-moisture bakery products containing whole or partially refined wheat flours or wheat bran fractions, (e.g., whole-wheat breadsticks and crackers). Due to the high content of unsaturated fatty acids and lipolytic enzymes, wheat bran is subject to oxidation phenomena, which is consequently one of the primary causes of shelf-life reduction (Alamprese et al., 2017). To limit oxidative reactions, the addition of antioxidant compounds to the formulation of a product has proven to be an effective solution (Peng et al., 2010; Jensen et al., 2011; Smith et al., 2004; Alamprese et al., 2017).
The aim of this study was to assess the environmental performance of a whole-wheat1 breadstick with extended shelf life and to evaluate whether the shelf-life extension can be an effective mitigation solution from an environmental point of view. Derived from the environmental assessment, the hotspots of the system were identified. To this purpose, the LCA approach (ISO, 2006) was applied from a ‘cradle-to-grave’ perspective. The shelf-life extension has been evaluated as a solution to reducing food losses, but its relationship to the environmental impact of the produced food has not been assessed.
Section snippets
Materials and methods
LCA is a holistic method of assessing the environmental impacts and resources used throughout the life of a product (process or activity), from raw material extraction, production and use, to waste disposal (ISO 14040, 2006). Over the years, LCA became the reference approach for assessing the environmental impact of agro-food productions; it has been widely considered to determine the environmental profile of numerous agricultural systems (Roy et al., 2007; Bacenetti and Fusi, 2015; Corrado et
Results and discussion
In this section, the environmental results for the two types of whole-wheat breadsticks (Scenario AoX and Scenario no AoX) are reported.
Conclusions
Considering the environmental impact related to food production and consumption, considerable environmental benefits can be achieved by reducing food losses. Among the different strategies that can be implemented for this purpose, little attention has been paid to the extension of shelf life. SLE can reduce food losses through the entire production system and, in particular, during the consumption step. In this study, the environmental consequences related to the SLE for a bakery product (the
Acknowledgements
This study was partially supported by Ministero dell'Istruzione, dell'Università e della Ricerca (Prot. 957/ric, 28/12/2012), through the Project 2012ZN3KJL “Long Life, High Sustainability”.
References (49)
H. Aiking
Future protein supply
Trends Food Sci. Technol.
(2011)
C. Alamprese et al.
Shelf life extension of whole-wheat breadsticks: formulation and packaging strategies
Food Chem.
(2017)
J. Azmir et al.
Techniques for extraction of bioactive compounds from plant materials: a review
J. Food Eng.
(2013)
J. Bacenetti et al.
The environmental burdens of maize silage production: Influence of different ensiling techniques
Anim. Feed Sci. Technol.
(2015)
C. Beretta et al.
Quantifying food losses and the potential for reduction in Switzerland
Waste Manag.
(2013)
B. Bravin et al.
Development and application of polysaccharide–lipid edible coating to extend shelf-life of dry bakery products
J. Food Eng.
(2006)
A. Cavaliere et al.
Mismatch between food sustainability and consumer acceptance toward innovation technologies among Millennial students: The case of Shelf Life Extension
J. Clean. Prod.
(2018)
S. Corrado et al.
Modelling of food loss within life cycle assessment: from current practice towards a systematization
J. Clean. Prod.
(2017)
A.I. De Luca et al.
Life cycle tools combined with multi-criteria and participatory methods for agricultural sustainability: insights from a systematic and critical review
Sci. Total Environ.
(2017)
A. Galli et al.
Mediterranean countries' food consumption and sourcing patterns: an ecological footprint viewpoint
Sci. Total Environ.
(2017)
View more references
Cited by (22)
Single-use versus reusable packaging for perishable liquid foods - Exploring evidence from research on climate impact and food safety
2024, Resources, Conservation and Recycling
Show abstract
Principles and recent applications of vacuum technology in the processing of dough-based cereal products: A comprehensive review
2023, Food Chemistry
Citation Excerpt :
Therefore, gluten-free products tend to get stale more quickly, as well as have a short shelf life (Gallagher et al., 2004; Osella et al., 2005). It is important to reduce the staling rate and increase the shelf-life stability in terms of both economic and safety reasons (Tuta Şimşek, 2020b), considering that every year, approximately 30% of products are lost as food waste (Bacenetti et al., 2018; Ronda & Roos, 2011). The vacuum baked breads had a crystalline structure and softer texture, and tended to stale more slowly compared to the control sample baked under atmospheric pressure.
Show abstract
Sustainability in food-waste reduction biotechnology: a critical review
2022, Current Opinion in Biotechnology
Show abstract
Stepwise guidance for data collection in the life cycle inventory (LCI) phase: Building technology-related LCI blocks
2022, Journal of Cleaner Production
Citation Excerpt :
Concerning the data collection step, 42.5% of the LCA case studies are found not to provide sufficient detail ("brief" and "no" flags in Fig. 2). A good example of transparent reporting of the data collection step is Bacenetti et al. (2018), as they detail the data collection for each unit process built for the study. As for the inclusion of LCI data, only 45% of the studies reported a complete LCI (green areas in Fig. 2).
Show abstract
Functional films based on mechanoactivated starch with prolonged release of preservative
2022, Food Bioscience
Citation Excerpt :
The problem of increasing the shelf life of food products and preserving their quality remains very relevant (Giménez & Ares, 2019; Manzocco et al., 2016; Spada et al., 2018). Extending the shelf life can also play an important role in reducing food waste (Bacenetti et al., 2018, pp. 627997–1007; Spada et al., 2018). Deterioration of the quality and loss of food products are associated with the action of microorganisms and oxidation processes (Abdel-Aziz et al., 2016; Rawat, 2015), which makes it necessary to use antimicrobials in the food industry.
Show abstract
Numerical simulation and experimental study of heat and mass transfer in cylinder-like vegetables during vacuum cooling
2021, Innovative Food Science and Emerging Technologies
Citation Excerpt :
However, keeping the freshness of harvested vegetables becomes a major problem because the respiration of plants will accelerate deterioration, resulting in the loss of nutritive value. Researches indicate that 45% of fruit and vegetable products rot each year (Bacenetti et al., 2018). Thus, considerable attention has been paid to maintaining the quality of vegetables during their storage and transportation (Ma, Zhang, Bhandari, & Gao, 2017; Waghmare & Annapure, 2013).
Show abstract
View all citing articles on Scopus
View full text
© 2018 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
Recommended articles
Extrusion treated meal concentrates of Brassica juncea as functionally improved ingredient in protein and fiber rich breadstick preparation
LWT, Volume 142, 2021, Article 111039
Priyadarshini Chakraborty, …, Minakshi Ghosh
Application of Lactobacillus amylovorus DSM19280 in gluten-free sourdough bread to improve the microbial shelf life
Food Microbiology, Volume 47, 2015, pp. 36-44
Claudia Axel, …, Elke K. Arendt
Eco-efficiency improvement by using integrative design and life cycle assessment. The case study of alternative bread supply chains in France
Journal of Cleaner Production, Volume 112, Part 4, 2016, pp. 2452-2461
Michal Kulak, …, Gérard Gaillard
Show 3 more articles
Article Metrics
Citations
Citation Indexes:
22
Captures
Readers:
88
View details
About ScienceDirect
Remote access
Shopping cart
Advertise
Contact and support
Terms and conditions
Privacy policy
Cookies are used by this site.
Cookie Settings
All content on this site: Copyright © 2024 Elsevier B.V., its licensors, and contributors. All rights are reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. For all open access content, the Creative Commons licensing terms apply.
We use cookies that are necessary to make our site work. We may also use additional cookies to analyze, improve, and personalize our content and your digital experience. For more information, see ourCookie Policy
Cookie Settings
Accept all cookies