We are aware of an issue impacting some readers trying to access content via their library’s proxy service. We are working to resolve this as soon as possible and apologize for any inconvenience.
Search within
Login / Register
JOURNALS


TOPICS
BOOKS
OTHER PUBLICATIONS
POLICIES
Membership
AGU.org
Earth's Future
Research Article
Open Access
Projecting Changes in the Frequency and Magnitude of Ozone Pollution Events Under Uncertain Climate Sensitivity
James D. East, 
Erwan Monier, 
Rebecca K. Saari, 
Fernando Garcia-Menendez
First published: 02 June 2024 https://doi.org/10.1029/2023EF003941
SECTIONS
PDF
TOOLS
SHARE
Abstract
Climate change is projected to worsen ozone pollution over many populated regions, with larger impacts at higher concentrations. More intense and frequent ozone episodes risk setbacks to human health and environmental policy achievements. However, assessing these changes is complicated by uncertain climate sensitivity, closely related to climate model response, and internal variability in simulations projecting climate's influence on air quality. Here, leveraging a global modeling framework that one-way couples a human activity model, an Earth system model of intermediate complexity, and an atmospheric chemistry model, we investigate the role of climate sensitivity in climate-induced changes to high ozone pollution episodes in the United States using multiple greenhouse gas emissions scenarios, representations of climate sensitivity, and initial condition members. We bias correct and evaluate historical model simulations, identifying modeled and observed O3 episodes using extreme value theory, and extend the approach to projections of mid- and end-century climate impacts. Results show that the influence of climate sensitivity can be as significant as that of greenhouse gas emissions scenario absent precursor emissions changes. Climate change is projected to increase the magnitude of the highest annually occurring O3 concentrations by over 2.3 ppb on average across the U.S. at mid-century under a high climate sensitivity and moderate emissions scenario, but the increase is limited to less than 0.3 ppb under lower climate sensitivity. Further, we show that areas in the U.S. currently meeting air quality standards risk being pushed into non-compliance due to a climate-induced increase in frequency of high ozone days.
Key Points
We project climate impacts on US ozone episodes with spatially varying bias correction and a climate and air quality simulation ensemble
Climate sensitivity can be as influential as GHG scenario without air pollutant emissions changes in mid-century ozone episodes
Climate-induced increases in ozone pollution may increase risk of not meeting air quality standards in several areas of the U.S.
Plain Language Summary
Climate change can worsen O3 air pollution across much of the U.S., threatening environmental policy goals and posing health risks. Projections of this impact rely on models that have uncertainties associated with simulating future climate. We investigated the influence of uncertainty from climate sensitivity, or the simulated change in Earth's average surface temperature in response to an increase in atmospheric CO2, on projections of air quality using a collection of simulations. To improve O3 estimates based on model simulations, we applied a new bias correction method to the model concentrations that accounts for spatial differences in atmospheric pollution. Then, we applied extreme value statistics to describe the behavior of the highest O3 concentrations. We found that, under climate change, the most polluted days worsen and occur more frequently, making it more difficult to meet air quality standards in highly populated regions and suggesting that continued efforts to mitigate pollutant emissions are necessary to counteract climate change's effects on O3. Further, our results indicate that the model's climate sensitivity is as influential as greenhouse gas emissions scenario for mid-century projections, showing that the strength of the earth system's response to greenhouse gas levels is a critical consideration when simulating climate impacts.
1 Introduction
Climate change is projected to affect future ozone (O3) pollution through multiple mechanisms, including changes to meteorology and chemistry, feedbacks from natural emissions sources, and changes to physical processes such as pollutant deposition (Fiore et al., 2015; Jacob & Winner, 2009; Zanis et al., 2022), with negative impacts on human health, the environment, and the economy (Fann et al., 2015, 2022; Garcia-Menendez et al., 2015; Nolte, Dolwick, et al., 2018). These impacts are expected to increase the magnitude and frequency of high ozone events (Brown-Steiner et al., 2015; Gao et al., 2020; Rieder et al., 2015; Schnell et al., 2016), as well as their co-occurrence with heat waves and particulate matter pollution episodes (Fiore et al., 2022; Meehl et al., 2018; Shen et al., 2016). By increasing the magnitude or frequency of the highest air pollutant concentrations, climate change could erase half of all gains from the Clean Air Act in the United States (Saari et al., 2019). Increases in extremes are particularly relevant for O3, for which small changes could imperil attainment to air quality standards, such as the U.S. National Ambient Air Quality Standards (NAAQS). However, climate policy will be a strong determinant of future O3 pollution (Garcia-Menendez et al., 2015). An improved understanding of these effects from climate change is critical to preparing sufficient air quality management efforts to meet ambient standards, and to effectively mitigate the impacts of O3 on human health and the environment.
Projections of climate impacts to O3 are complicated by uncertainties in climate projections that stem from three primary sources: internal variability, greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions scenario, and climate model response (Callahan & Mankin, 2020; Deser et al., 2020; Hawkins & Sutton, 2009; Lehner et al., 2020; Mankin et al., 2020; Monier et al., 2015; U.S. EPA, 2015a). Each of these uncertainties propagates to impacts on O3 (East et al., 2022), leading to varying estimates of the distribution, magnitude, and regional sign of the “climate penalty” on surface O3 (Fiore et al., 2012, 2015; Garcia-Menendez et al., 2017; Nolte et al., 2021; Rieder et al., 2018; Turnock et al., 2020; Wu et al., 2008; Zanis et al., 2022). Climate sensitivity, closely related to climate model response, refers to the earth system's response to external forcing and in climate models is quantified as the change in average surface temperature for a doubling of atmospheric CO2 (Sherwood et al., 2020). The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) reports the very likely range for Earth's climate sensitivity to be 2.0–5.0°C (IPCC, 2021), but some recent generation climate models report sensitivities at the upper end and higher than the very likely range (Tokarska et al., 2020; Zelinka et al., 2020). As a result, projections of climate impacts, including those on air quality, will differ depending on the underlying climate model's sensitivity, even when controlling for internal variability and using the same GHG emissions scenario (Hausfather et al., 2022; U.S. EPA, 2015a). The influence of climate sensitivity on modeled estimates of climate change impacts been clearly established in impacts studies focusing on different sectors, such as agriculture (Blanc et al., 2017), water resources (Strzepek et al., 2015), infrastructure (Neumann et al., 2015), and forest productivity and wildfires (Kim et al., 2017).
The influence of different climate sensitivities on projections of surface O3 extremes has not been examined. Previous research showed that higher climate sensitivity may further exacerbate future air pollution (East et al., 2022), but few studies project ozone pollution extreme events while accounting for this uncertainty. While some studies simulating climate-driven changes in occurrences of high O3 have used multiple initializations to address internal variability (Fiore et al., 2022; Rieder et al., 2015, 2018), most rely on a single GHG emissions pathway (Meehl et al., 2018; Rieder et al., 2015), and a single climate sensitivity. Consequently, the projections depend implicitly on a particular realization of a climate model's sensitivity for a given GHG scenario, but the robustness of these projected impacts on O3 episodes to different realizations of climate sensitivity in the very likely range remains unexplored.
A further challenge to projecting O3 extremes is that climate-chemistry models exhibit a consistent high bias when compared to historical observations (Brown-Steiner et al., 2015; Lamarque et al., 2012; Liu et al., 2022; Turnock et al., 2020). While projecting concentration changes between historical and future climates often account for the bias by considering relative changes, concentration thresholds are important to assess air pollution extremes (Phalitnonkiat et al., 2016; Rieder et al., 2013). Correction methods have been used to address model bias, but may only correct the bias in mean O3 concentrations (Brown-Steiner et al., 2015). Rieder et al. (2015) addresses this by accounting for climate-induced changes to the O3 distributions. However, the correction is applied using observations in a limited region, an approach that may not be valid if observations from large and heterogenous regions are considered. To examine the impacts of climate change on extreme air pollution, approaches are needed to bias correct model fields covering large geographic areas and locations with diverse statistical characteristics.
Here, we bias-correct modeled ground-level O3, introducing an approach to apply the bias correction over an area with heterogeneous concentrations, and analyze the impact of climate change on the frequency and magnitude of high O3 episodes in the U.S. We use a model framework that one-way couples a human activity model, a single Earth system model of intermediate complexity, and a global atmospheric chemistry model. We generate an ensemble of simulations designed to capture uncertainty due to climate sensitivity, GHG emissions pathway, and internal variability in climate projections by simulating climate impacts on air quality in 30-year time slices at the beginning (1981–2010), middle (2036–2065), and end (2086–2115) of the 21st century, with five initial condition members, three climate sensitivity scenarios, and three GHG emissions scenarios. In total, the ensemble includes over 2,800 annual climate and air quality simulations, which we leverage to assess the influence of climate uncertainties within the projections. Our results project a deleterious climate change impact on high O3 concentrations, with increases to their magnitude and frequency across much of the U.S. In the absence of precursor emissions changes, these climate-induced effects may bring areas into non-compliance with existing National Air Quality Standards by mid-century. The analysis further reveals climate sensitivity as an important driver in projected climate change impacts during the 21st century.
2 Methods
2.1 Modeling Framework and Simulation Ensemble
To project the impacts of climate change on high summer (May–September; MJJAS) O3 concentrations over the U.S., we rely on an ensemble of simulations generated with a climate and air quality modeling framework. In this framework, the Massachusetts Institute of Technology Integrated Global System Model (MIT IGSM) is coupled to the National Center for Atmospheric Research Community Atmosphere Model (CAM) to simulate historical and future climate scenarios (Monier et al., 2013). The MIT IGSM couples a global human activity model, the Economic Projection and Policy Analysis (EPPA) model (Chen et al., 2016; Paltsev et al., 2005), with an earth system model of intermediate complexity, the MIT Earth System Model (MESM) (Sokolov et al., 2018). EPPA is a computable general equilibrium economic model that simulates economic activity and GHG emissions according to policy constraints (Paltsev et al., 2005). GHG emissions and land use change from EPPA are used as inputs to the MESM Earth system model. In the MIT-IGSM CAM framework, MESM simulates 3-dimensional climate fields using coupled ocean, land, and atmosphere components. Monthly sea surface temperatures and sea-ice cover, simulated with a 3-dimensional dynamical ocean model, are provided to CAM, along with GHG concentrations and land use changes (Monier et al., 2018).
A feature of the MIT IGSM-CAM is the ability to adjust its climate sensitivity by modulating the cloud radiative feedback strength, a primary cause of different climate sensitivity in different climate models (Zelinka et al., 2020). The cloud radiative feedback strength adjustment required to achieve a given climate sensitivity is determined from the global mean temperature change in a perturbed simulation versus a pre-industrial control simulation, as described in Sokolov and Monier (2012). Versions of the model with different climate sensitivity have different climate responses to changes in greenhouse gas and aerosol concentrations that manifest primarily in surface temperature, and indirectly as changes in precipitation and general circulation patterns (Monier et al., 2013, 2015). The MIT-IGSM CAM has been shown to realistically simulate historical climate system observations (Monier et al., 2013; Sokolov et al., 2018; Waldhoff et al., 2015) and U.S. temperatures in line with those reported by the National Climate Assessment (NCA) (Vose et al., 2017). The framework is described in detail in Monier et al. (2013, 2018).
To project climate change impacts on air quality, meteorological fields from the MIT IGSM-CAM are used to drive atmospheric chemistry with the CAM-Chem model (version 1.1.2), used in its offline mode as described in Lamarque et al. (2012). CAM-Chem simulates over 100 gas and aerosol species using a modified implementation of the Model for Ozone and Related Chemical Tracers (MOZART-4) chemical mechanism (Lamarque et al., 2012) at 1.9° × 2.5° horizontal resolution with 26 vertical layers extending to the lower stratosphere. In the CAM-Chem simulations, anthropogenic emissions are from the Precursors of Ozone and their Effects in the Troposphere (POET) inventory (Lamarque et al., 2012) and, along with GHGs including CH4, are fixed at start-of-the-century (year 2000) levels to isolate the impact of 21st century climate change on O3. Biogenic emissions of isoprene and monoterpenes, simulated with the Model of Emissions of Gases and Aerosols from Nature (MEGAN) version 2 (Guenther et al., 2012) within CAM-Chem, include online feedbacks to changes in temperature. Lightning, wildfire, wetland, and soil emissions in the CAM-Chem simulations do not respond to variations in climate. Dry deposition follows Val Martin et al. (2014), which may lead to slightly higher O3 dry deposition rates than more recent model parameterizations (Emmons et al., 2020). CAM-Chem has been previously evaluated for simulations of U.S. air quality (Brown-Steiner et al., 2015; Lamarque et al., 2012; Tilmes et al., 2015) and performs similarly when linked to the MIT IGSM-CAM, exhibiting a high bias for surface O3, shown in Figure S1 of the Supporting Information S1, while capturing observed spatiotemporal patterns (Brown-Steiner et al., 2018). The modeling framework has been used to project the potential impacts of climate on air quality and health (Brown-Steiner et al., 2018; East et al., 2022; Garcia-Menendez et al., 2015, 2017; Pienkosz et al., 2019; Saari et al., 2019).
Future climate and air quality are simulated with the IGSM-CAM linked to CAM-Chem in an ensemble of simulations of 30-year time-slices centered on the beginning (1981–2010), middle (2036–2065), and end (2086–2115) of the 21st century. The simulation at the beginning of the century is referred to throughout the manuscript as the historical simulation. Three future GHG emissions scenarios, developed for the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency's (EPA) Climate Change Impacts and Risk Analysis (CIRA) program (U.S. EPA, 2015a) are modeled. Emissions control scenarios P4.5 and P3.7 limit end-of-century radiative forcings to 4.5 and 3.7 W/m2, respectively, by implementing a global tax on carbon emissions. CO2 concentrations for the emissions control scenarios are comparable to the Representative Concentration Pathways (RCP), with end-of-century concentrations for both scenarios between RCP4.5 and RCP2.6 (Moss et al., 2010). A reference scenario (REF) is simulated in which no GHG emissions policy is implemented, representing an upper bound for potential climate change impacts. Atmospheric CO2 concentrations in REF are comparable to those of RCP8.5 at end-of-century. Changes to GHG concentrations simulated for each emissions scenario alter the radiative forcing in the MIT IGSM-CAM simulations, but GHG concentrations are held constant at year-2000 levels for chemistry calculations. The emissions scenarios are further described in Monier et al. (2015) and Paltsev et al. (2015).
Under each emissions scenario, three different levels of climate system response to increasing GHG concentrations, or climate sensitivities, are considered. Climate sensitivity is defined as the global mean temperature increase in response to a doubling of atmospheric CO2 concentrations. Here, climate sensitivities of 2.0, 3.0, and 4.5°C (CS2.0, CS3.0, and CS4.5) are considered, based on the very likely range and best estimate (3.0°C) of Earth's climate sensitivity reported in the IPCC's Sixth Assessment Report (IPCC, 2021), using the MIT IGSM-CAM's cloud radiative adjustment method (Sokolov & Monier, 2012). In the simulations with different climate sensitivities, surface O3 in CAM-Chem is indirectly influenced by changes to MIT IGSM-CAM's climate response. Versions of the MIT IGSM-CAM with different climate sensitivities have different climate responses to a given GHG emissions scenario, leading to differences in surface temperature, precipitation, and general circulation patterns, which in turn impact O3 concentrations and air quality.
Internal variability is reproduced by using 30-year simulations and five unique climate model initializations under each emissions scenario and climate sensitivity combination. Unique initializations are generated by applying atmosphere and land component initial conditions taken from different random years of a pre-industrial control simulation of the MIT IGSM-CAM simulations and stochastic surface wind forcing over the ocean (Monier et al., 2013). In total, over 2,800 years of climate and air quality are simulated. U.S. population estimates are based on year-2000 estimates from the Gridded Population of the World, Version 3 data set from the Center for International Earth Science Information Network (CIESIN) (CIESIN, 2005) and are treated as constant throughout the 21st century.
2.2 Bias Correction Approach
CAM-Chem simulations, like those from global climate-chemistry models, exhibit a high bias in ground-level O3 concentrations relative to observations at air quality monitoring sites (Brown-Steiner et al., 2015; Emmons et al., 2020; Lamarque et al., 2012; Liu et al., 2022; Schnell et al., 2015; Schwantes et al., 2020; Turnock et al., 2020). We address CAM-Chem's high bias relative to historical daily maximum 8-hr (MDA8) O3 observations by applying a quantile mapping (QM) bias correction approach following that of Rieder et al. (2015). Here, modeled summer MDA8 O3 concentrations are bias-corrected using observations from the U.S EPA's Clean Air Status and Trends Network (CASTNET) (U.S. EPA, 2020). CASTNET sites are located in rural locations that better capture regional O3 concentrations, making them better suited to evaluate coarse resolution model fields, as opposed to other monitoring networks with urban and near-road sites. For bias correction, we use all valid summer CASTNET observations from all available sites overlapping the 1981–2010 historical simulation—73 sites in the U.S. First, modeled and observed MDA8 O3 concentrations are separated into quantile bins with width 0.001 and evenly spaced between 0 and 1. Next, we apply QM by adjusting the modeled MDA8 O3 so that each quantile of the modeled distribution matches the corresponding quantile of the observation distribution (Maraun, 2013). As a result, the model and observed MDA8 O3 frequency distributions match, a critical feature to assess extremes over a threshold that would not be achieved if only the mean bias were corrected. QM is then applied to MDA8 O3 projections at mid- and end-century. To bias correct future ozone distributions, first, the ratio between uncorrected future and uncorrected historical simulations is calculated at each quantile. Then, MDA8 O3 values from the corrected historical simulation within each quantile are scaled by the corresponding future-to-historical quantile ratio. The resulting future O3 concentrations are bias-corrected with respect to CASTNET values but reflect projected climate change impacts on future O3. The quantile mapping procedure, along with differences from the approach in Rieder et al. (2015), is further described by Equations S1–S11 in Supporting Information S1.
A decreasing trend in ground-level O3 was observed in the U.S. after NOx (NOx = NO + NO2) State Implementation Plans (SIP) were put into action starting in 1998 (Simon et al., 2015). However, because anthropogenic precursor emissions are fixed in the CAM-Chem simulations used, such a trend is not reflected in the model's emissions or O3 concentrations. Here, we focus on the model's ability to capture elevated surface O3 pollution events during the historical period, rather than its ability to capture trends driven by changes to anthropogenic precursor emissions. Thus, we remove the linear trend, by subtracting the linear least-squares fit of daily MDA8 CASTNET data and adding back the mean of the year 2000, before applying the bias correction. A similar approach was applied in the O3 analysis presented by Brown-Steiner et al. (2018).
The spatial distribution of CASTNET sites does not match the simulation grid resolution, so some modeled MDA8 O3 cannot be bias-corrected by coincident observations, and some grid cells contain multiple corresponding observations. This can be addressed by correcting grid cells with adjacent observations in a nearest-neighbor approach, or by aggregating observations or model values into joint frequency distributions across broad regions, as in Rieder et al. (2015, 2018). However, in the continental U.S. study area used here, many grid cells are distant from monitoring sites and the statistical characteristics of MDA O3 vary widely across the domain. Consequently, in this study, both nearest-neighbor and aggregation may lead to unreliable results and are not suitable approaches for correcting model O3 where there are no corresponding observations. To address the need to bias correct gridded, modeled MDA8 O3 over a large, chemically heterogenous area lacking full observational coverage, we organize the sites and the model grid cells into clusters according to the statistical characteristics of MDA8 O3 in the site or grid cell and apply QM within each cluster.
To create clusters, we group CASTNET sites and grid cells statistically based on location and MDA8 O3 concentrations and variability. In this approach, we first use k-means clustering to group the CASTNET sites by features including latitude, longitude, mean O3 concentration, O3 standard deviation, and 95th percentile O3 concentration. Then, we assign model grid cells to the CASTNET clusters determined using the same features. We use a k-means unsupervised machine learning algorithm and a nearest centroid unsupervised learning function to achieve the clustering (Pedregosa et al., 2011). In k-means clustering, both the grouping features and the number of clusters must be prescribed—we test combinations of grouping features and number of clusters to identify which leads to the most effective bias correction. We test the use of 2–25 clusters, and for each number of clusters, test all combinations of grouping by O3 mean, O3 standard deviation, and 95th percentile O3 at each site or grid cell. Latitude and longitude are always included as clustering features. We select the combination of clustering features and number of clusters that minimize the test statistic for the k-samples Anderson-Darling test, which assesses the null hypothesis that the joint frequency distributions of all observations and all bias-corrected model MDA8 O3 values are from the same population (Scholz & Stephens, 1987). We assume the same model clustering for mid- and end-century as for the historical simulation.
We apply two tests to check robustness of the clustering and bias-correction method. First, as k-means is sensitive to data order, we repeat the process of testing the grouping feature and cluster number choice on a subset of the data for the year 2000. The k-means algorithm and quantile mapping are applied 100 times for each combination of grouping feature and use of 2–25 clusters with the data order randomized each time. The k-samples Anderson-Darling test statistic is calculated for each iteration and compared to those calculated using the full ordered data set. In the final bias correction used for extremes analysis, data are input to k-means grouped by site ID in alphabetical order and then by observation time in ascending order. Second, we perform 10-fold cross validation, in which a random 10% of the data is removed and the clustering and bias correction are performed. This is repeated 10 times with a different 10% of the data removed, producing 10 sets of bias-corrected model MDA8 O3. Finally, we average across the 10 sets of bias-corrected values to produce a single mean correction, and then calculate the normalized mean bias compared to observations in the cross validation, evaluating whether the bias is removed from the modeled values. While the tests described here serve to increase confidence in the bias correction for the historical period, spatially varying climate impacts on O3 could lead to clustering changes not captured by assuming clusters stay constant till end-of-century.
2.3 Extreme Value Theory
Extreme value theory has been previously used to estimate return values, the maximum value expected during a specified time period, of observed and modeled O3 (Brown-Steiner et al., 2015; Phalitnonkiat et al., 2016; Rieder et al., 2013, 2015; Shen et al., 2016). We apply the general approach taken in these studies following Coles (2001). To identify modeled and observed extremes, we define extremes according to the points-over-threshold (POT) method as any summer MDA8 O3 concentration exceeding the current National Ambient Air Quality Standard (NAAQS) of 70 ppb. Extremes identified using POT asymptotically tend to a generalized Pareto (GP) distribution (Coles, 2001):
G ( x ) = 1 − 1 + ξ ( x − u ) σ − 1 / ξ
(1)
for x > u, σ > 0, and 1 + ξ(x − u)/σ > 0. G(x) is the GP distribution function, u is the location parameter, which is the threshold used to define extreme concentrations, set to 70 ppb, and x is the bias-corrected model O3 concentration data. We fit the GP distribution to the model concentrations by estimating the shape and scale parameters ξ and σ, respectively, using maximum likelihood estimation (MLE) for each grid cell in the historical simulation and at middle, and end-century. 1 − G(x) gives the probability that a modeled MDA8 O3 concentration x will be exceeded, given that x is larger than the 70 ppb threshold. This allows calculation of probabilistic return levels and intervals following Coles (2001), which we do for each model grid cell in the historical simulation and at middle and end of the 21st century.
We evaluate the model's ability to reproduce O3 extremes by comparing 1-year return levels at CASTNET sites and simulated return levels based on uncorrected and bias-corrected modeled MDA8 O3. We then compute 1-year return levels and 70-ppb return intervals in historical and future modeled O3 for each period and each member in the simulation ensemble. For each model grid cell, we use the Kolmogorov-Smirnov (KS) test to evaluate whether the extremes in each grid cell follow the GP distribution at the 95% confidence level. Results not meeting this criterion are not considered reliable. To further test for the potential effects of NOx SIP implementation, we separately compute 1-year O3 for pre-SIP CASTNET observations and corresponding model O3 only.
3 Results and Discussion
3.1 Bias Correction of Simulated O3 Concentrations
High ground-level O3 concentrations modeled in the historical simulation reflect a high bias relative to CASTNET observations. The bias correction applied reduces the discrepancies between observed and simulated concentration extremes. In Figure 1, 1-year MDA8 O3 return levels (1-year O3) calculated from CASTNET observations are compared to 1-year O3 estimated from the uncorrected and bias-corrected CAM-Chem concentration fields. Modeled MDA8 O3 concentrations in the evaluation are drawn from the historical simulation with a 3°C climate sensitivity and averaged across all initial condition members. In the evaluation, CASTNET and modeled MDA8 O3 from 1996 to 2005 are used to calculate 1-year O3, and only CASTNET sites with at least 6 years of summer data within this time frame are included. For each site, the linear trend is removed and the mean of the MDA8 O3 is set to the site mean in the year 2000 before calculating 1-year O3 return levels. Using the uncorrected CAM-Chem predictions leads to biases in 1-year O3 estimates that exceed 68 ppb at individual sites. On average across all CASTNET locations, model bias reaches 27 ppb. Bias correction of model results according to statistical k-means groupings results in 1-year O3 estimates with an average 3 ppb low bias relative to 1-year O3 based on CASTNET observations. Several sites in the western U.S., more rural and with lower average O3 observations, have insufficient occurrences of high concentrations to calculate return levels, despite having ample valid data.
Figure 1
Open in figure viewer
PowerPoint
Modeled and observed historical O3 return levels. Inner circles show 1-year O3 return levels at CASTNET sites estimated from model MDA8 O3 predictions (a) without bias correction and (b) with bias correction using k-means clustering. Outer circles show 1-year O3 estimated from CASTNET site observations. White inner or outer circles indicate an insufficient number of high O3 values to calculate a return level. Differences between the return levels estimated from modeled concentrations and CASTNET observations are shown in (c) and (d). Gray circles indicate an insufficient number of high O3 values in either modeled concentrations or CASTNET observations to estimate a return level. CASTNET and model data are from 1996 to 2005. Only CASTNET sites with at least 6 seasons of data within this time frame are included.
Results for pre-SIP observations are shown in Figure S2 of the Supporting Information S1. For this test, only CASTNET data prior to 2001 is considered, no detrending is applied, and sites with a statistically significant mean trend are excluded from the analysis. While the total number of sites and observations is lower in that comparison, the conclusion that bias-corrected MDA8 O3 better represents observed concentration extremes remains.
The best performing bias correction was achieved with 15 clusters, grouped by latitude, longitude, and mean MDA8 O3. This clustering scheme realizes the minimum k-samples Anderson Darling test statistic of 1.9 and is confirmed by the tests for robustness. This scheme is used for results subsequently presented. Bias-correcting MDA8 O3 improves normalized mean error and normalized mean bias compared to CASTNET observations from 44 to 36 ppb, respectively, to 27 and 0.2 ppb (27 and −0.3 ppb in the 10-fold cross-validation). Figure S3 in Supporting Information S1 shows the error and bias for 1, 2, 5, 10, and 25-year ozone return levels estimated from uncorrected and bias-corrected model concentrations compared to CASTNET return levels. Bias-correcting model MDA8 O3 reduces bias to less than 5 ppb at all return levels considered, while calculating extremes using uncorrected model MDA O3 results in biases of over 27 ppb in 1-year return intervals and over 43 ppb in 25-year return intervals.
3.2 Impact of Natural Variability on Modeling Extreme Ozone
Several studies have highlighted the importance of considering internal variability in modeling the impacts of climate on ozone (Barnes et al., 2016; Brown-Steiner et al., 2018; Garcia-Menendez et al., 2017). Figure 2 shows how multiple initializations can improve model representation of ozone concentration extremes and decrease the potential error caused by underrepresenting internal variability. Here, the potential error is defined by first calculating the error in model-based 1-year O3 estimates for each initial condition ensemble member at each CASTNET site relative to observations. Then, for each site, the maximum error is chosen, representing the potential error. The mean error is calculated by averaging 1-year O3 across all ensemble members at each site and comparing this at each site to 1-year O3 estimated from observations. In Figure 2, the potential error and mean error across initial condition members based on uncorrected and bias-corrected model predictions at all sites considered are included. The difference between the potential error and the mean error represents an estimate of the potential error due to not adequately accounting for internal variability. Internal variability can increase errors in return level estimates relative to observations. Relying on multiple initial condition ensemble members decreases potential error in modeled 1-year O3 by 1.7 ppb on average compared to a single initial condition simulation, after bias correction. At individual sites, the potential error resulting from single initial condition simulations can exceed that derived from multiple initial conditions by over 4 ppb. Relative to 1-year O3 estimates based on uncorrected model predictions, error is reduced by over 22 ppb on average at all sites considered by applying bias-correction and using multiple initial conditions, and by as much as 63 ppb at specific locations. Applying extreme value theory across a 10-year time series and using multiple initial condition members allows for a better fit of the GP distribution, improving probabilistic estimates of high pollution events. The mean of the five initial condition ensemble members is used in subsequent results.
Figure 2
Open in figure viewer
PowerPoint
Potential and mean error in simulated O3 1-year return levels relative to observations. Histograms show the distribution of errors in 1-year O3 estimates based on modeled concentrations relative to values based on observations at CASTNET sites. Green bars show maximum potential errors associated with using a single initial condition simulation, created by calculating the error in 1-year O3 estimates for each initial condition ensemble member at each CASTNET site, and then choosing the maximum error at each site. Orange and purple bars show mean errors in estimates based on mean O3 concentrations across five initial condition ensemble members with and without bias correction. Gaussian kernel density empirical distributions of the data are overlaid as solid lines.
3.3 Extremes Projected to the Future
The study's projections suggest that climate change will increase the frequency and magnitude of high O3 incidences over much of the U.S. Figure 3 shows how magnitude (1-year O3 return level) and frequency (70 ppb MDA8 O3 return interval) of high O3 events are projected to change with and without the implementation of climate policy at mid and end century. Over the U.S., 1-year O3 return levels estimated from the historical simulation average 83 ppb and exceed 100 ppb over some areas. Climate change is projected to increase the magnitude and frequency of high O3 concentrations across much of the country, increasing average 1-year O3 by close to 2 ppb at mid-century and end of century relative to the historical simulation. During the second half of the 21st century, projected return levels in the Southeastern U.S. and Gulf coast decrease slightly while continuing to increase elsewhere. Historical estimates and projected climate-induced changes to 1-year O3 in the Northeastern U.S. generally agree with those reported by Rieder et al. (2015), which similarly projected larger increases at mid-century than end-century under an emissions scenario close to the P4.5 scenario used here and examined only the Northeastern U.S.
Figure 3
Open in figure viewer
PowerPoint
Historical and projected intensity and frequency of high O3 pollution. 1-year MDA8 O3 return levels estimated from the historical simulation (a) and changes projected under emissions scenario P4.5 and a 3°C climate sensitivity at mid- (b) and end-century (c), relative to the historical period, are shown. 70 ppb MDA8 O3 return intervals estimated from the historical simulation (d) and changes projected at mid- (e) and end-century (f) are also shown. Gray areas show grid cells where an insufficient number of high concentrations were simulated in the historical simulation to calculate a return level. Hatching indicates model grid cells in which the GP distribution does not pass the KS test at 95% confidence for all initial conditions.
Return interval projections suggest that climate change may make days with MDA8 O3 exceeding 70 ppb more common across much of the U.S. (Figure 3). The largest increases in return interval, up to 90 days, occur in areas where the 1-year O3 level is slightly above the 70 ppb threshold and the historical return interval is close to 1 year. These increases represent a potential for climate change to increase the frequency of high O3 pollution in areas where it was infrequently experienced. In some areas, 70 ppb return intervals for MDA8 O3 are projected to decrease (e.g., locations in Southern California, Louisiana, and Texas). Over many areas where the return interval decreases and the return level increases, both the magnitude and the frequency of high O3 incidents are projected to increase under climate change.
Projected increases in the frequency of high O3 concentrations can increase the risk of not meeting air quality standards by mid-century in areas currently attaining them. Figure 4 shows the number of days per year with MDA8 O3 exceeding 70 ppb across the U.S. in the historical simulation and climate-induced change at mid-century. Regions complying with the current O3 NAAQS in the historical simulation but projected to exceed an MDA8 O3 concentration of 70 ppb at least four times per year on average (in accordance with the O3 NAAQS form) due to the impact of climate are shown in Figure 4. At these locations the projected return interval for 70 ppb MDA8 O3 is 91 days or less at midcentury, but greater than that at the start of the century. Under emissions scenario P4.5 and a climate sensitivity of 3.0°C, the areas brought into NAAQS non-compliance encompass 8.5 million residents, using year-2000 population levels. Over the areas of the U.S. where NAAQS are exceeded during the historical simulation, an average of 1.8 additional exceedance days per year are simulated at mid-century under the same scenario. This is slightly lower than the 2.3 days per year projected by Shen et al. (2016), who derived O3 climate penalty estimates based on a GHG emissions scenario similar to P4.5 and modeled temperature changes, rather than atmospheric chemistry simulations.
Figure 4
Open in figure viewer
PowerPoint
Average number of days per year with MDA8 O3 exceeding 70 ppb (a) during the historical simulation, and (b)–(g) change at mid-century under the P4.5 and REF greenhouse gas emissions scenarios and climate sensitivities 2.0, 3.0, and 4.5°C. Average days exceeding 70 ppb are calculated using probabilistic return periods for 70 ppb MDA8 O3 and averaged over all initial condition ensemble members. Gray areas in (a) have an insufficient number of exceedances to probabilistically model extremes values. Boxed areas in (b)–(g) are projected to exceed an MDA8 O3 concentration of 70 ppb at least four times per year on average (exceeding the current O3 NAAQS) due to the impact of climate change, but are in attainment of the NAAQS in the historical simulation.
3.4 Influence of Climate Sensitivity and Greenhouse Gas Emissions
Variations in climate sensitivity amplify or attenuate future O3 episodes, depending on the projected impact of climate change. Figure 5 shows mid-century changes to 1-year O3 projected under each GHG emissions scenario and climate sensitivity considered in the simulation ensemble, relative to the historical simulation. Corresponding changes at end-century are shown in Figure S4 of the Supporting Information S1 and show similar patterns to those at mid-century but larger increases, exceeding 35 ppb in some locations relative to the historical simulation under the highest GHG emissions and climate sensitivity scenario. Projected climate-induced increases to 1-year O3 are larger at higher climate sensitivity (CS4.5) compared to lower climate sensitivity (CS2.0) across all policy scenarios. However, while average 1-year O3 generally increases as GHG emissions increase, differences among emissions scenarios are relatively small under low climate sensitivity (CS2.0). In contrast, differences among emissions scenarios are substantial at higher climate sensitivity, with 1-year O3 projected to increase by over 4 ppb on average under the REF scenario, but only 1 ppb under the P3.7 scenario. Impacts projected under high GHG emissions and low climate sensitivity are similar to those projected under high climate sensitivity and low GHG emissions, with average climate-induced changes differing by less than 0.5 ppb.
Figure 5
Open in figure viewer
PowerPoint
Projected climate-induced change in 1-year MDA8 O3 return levels at mid-century under different GHG emissions (P3.7, P4.5, REF) and climate sensitivity (2.0, 3.0, 4.5°C) scenarios. Changes shown are relative to the historical simulation with the same climate sensitivity. Cells are hatched where modeled extremes do not match the fitted GP distribution at the 95% confidence interval according to the KS test. Gray areas have an insufficient number of high O3 concentrations in the historical simulation to estimate a return level.
Uncertainty in climate sensitivity also affects projections of future air quality standard attainment. In the P4.5 scenario simulations, using U.S. population in the year-2000 as a reference point, a 2.0°C climate sensitivity results in an estimated 3.5 million additional people living in U.S. areas out of compliance with the O3 NAAQS at mid-century, while this number is over 9 million people with a 4.5°C climate sensitivity. Under the REF unconstrained emissions scenario, both the effect of climate sensitivity and risk of new areas exceeding the NAAQS is larger. For example, under the REF scenario, climate sensitivities of 2.0, 3.0, and 4.5°C result in 5 million, 12 million, and 13.5 million additional people, respectively, in areas with MDA8 O3 exceeding 70 ppb at least four times per year on average by mid-century. Although the geographic distribution of the U.S. population may shift during the 21st century, these estimates further highlight the potential of climate policy in limiting future risk of exceeding air pollution thresholds, and show the role climate sensitivity may play in complicating attainment of air quality standards under climate change.
Multiple competing mechanisms, which are described for our modeling system in Garcia-Menendez et al. (2015), drive changes to O3 concentrations and are similar to influences reported in previous studies. For example, higher O3 concentrations are generally correlated with increasing surface temperature and greater stagnation (Doherty et al., 2013; Schnell & Prather, 2017; Weaver et al., 2009). In more polluted regions, additional O3 formation in a warmer climate is associated with increased temperature sensitive biogenic precursor emissions (Guo et al., 2018; Weaver et al., 2009), while in less polluted background areas, higher relative humidity shortens O3 lifetime, leading to some O3 decreases (Jacob & Winner, 2009; Zanis et al., 2022). Because O3 decreases tend to happen in cleaner regions, those areas do not always have sufficient 70 ppb exceedances to calculate return levels, and in those cases climate-driven changes do not appear on the maps (e.g., Figures 3-5). However, projected decreases to 1-year O3 occur in the central U.S. (Figure 5), particularly under low climate sensitivity, while small decreases in exceedance frequency appear around the Gulf Coast and other areas of the U.S. (Figure 4). The impacts on high O3 concentrations broadly agree with other modeling studies linking climate change to shifts in the upper-percentiles of U.S. O3 pollution, including impacts derived from an ensemble of multiple climate-chemistry models (Schnell et al., 2016). Finer resolution simulations may better resolve chemical and meteorological processes associated with the highest O3 concentrations (Nolte et al., 2021).
3.5 Extreme Changes Beyond the Mean
Prior studies have noted larger increases in the upper quantiles of projected O3 distributions in projections of the climate impact to O3 (e.g., Nolte, Dolwick, et al., 2018; Nolte, Spero, et al., 2018; Pfister et al., 2014; Schnell et al., 2016). Here, we find that, while this is generally true, climate sensitivity can play an important role in modulating this impact. Figure 6 shows U.S.-average mean ground-level O3 and 1-year O3 for the historical simulation and at mid- and end-century under all GHG emissions scenarios and climate sensitivities considered, as well as projected changes relative to the historical simulation. Areas for which a 1-year O3 return level cannot be estimated are excluded from the mean ozone change estimate. Both mean and 1-year O3 increase at mid and end-century across all scenarios, with larger concentrations projected under REF compared to other scenarios. Larger increases to mean and 1-year O3 using P3.7 at a medium (CS3.0) versus the highest (CS4.5) climate sensitivity, and smaller 1-year O3 increases under P4.5 compared to P3.7 using the lowest (CS2.0) climate sensitivity—features also evident in Figure 5—highlight the nonlinear relationship between climate change and O3 concentrations. In all cases, however, projected increases to the O3 distribution extremes are larger than the increases in mean values. In a relative sense, the influence of climate sensitivity becomes clear. For example, under the REF emissions scenario at mid-century, 1-year O3 increases by 1.9% (1.5 ppb) and mean O3 increases by 2.0% (0.6 ppb) with a low climate sensitivity of CS2.0, while under a high climate sensitivity of CS4.5, 1-year O3 increase 5.1% (4.0 ppb) and mean O3 increases 3.7% (1.5 ppb). At end-century, relative increases in upper-tail O3 are larger than for average O3 under all climate sensitivities in the REF scenario, while the opposite is true in a stringent GHG emissions control scenario (P3.7). This differential impact at the highest O3 concentrations emphasizes the influence of climate sensitivity uncertainty in projections of climate impacts on high pollution episodes and attainment of air quality standards.
Figure 6
Open in figure viewer
PowerPoint
U.S. average 1-year MDA8 O3 return levels and mean MDA8 O3 concentration at start, middle, and end of 21st century under each GHG emissions (P3.7, P4.5, REF) and climate sensitivity (CS2.0, CS3.0, CS4.5) scenario considered. 1-year O3 and mean O3 MDA8 concentrations estimated from bias-corrected O3 simulations are shown in (a) and (b). Projected changes in U.S. average 1-year O3 and mean MDA8 O3 concentrations under the scenarios considered, relative to start-of-century, are shown at mid-century (c) and end-century (d).
The correlation between high climate sensitivity and larger increases to the upper tail of the O3 distribution may be driven by multiple factors. In our modeling system, soil NOx and anthropogenic precursor emissions are held constant, while temperature-sensitive biogenic precursor emissions vary with climate. Feedbacks from biogenic emissions lead to larger responses in the highest O3 concentrations in other simulations of climate and chemistry (Weaver et al., 2009; Wu et al., 2008), and have been shown to enhance the most O3 polluted summer days alongside local anthropogenic and soil NOx emissions (Guo et al., 2018). This suggests a possible role of climate-sensitive biogenic emissions in amplifying increases to the high end of the O3 distribution in our simulations. More work is needed to shed light on the drivers of the potential relationship between climate sensitivity and intensified air pollution episodes.
4 Conclusions and Implications
Climate change is projected to negatively impact U.S. air quality through changes to ground-level O3, increasing the U.S. average annual mean concentrations and the frequency and magnitude of extreme ozone events. In this study, we examine climate change's influence on the highest O3 concentrations using a multiple-initial-condition ensemble of climate and air quality simulations that consider varying climate sensitivity and different GHG emissions scenarios. We show that the model can capture historical extremes after applying statistical clustering and a quantile mapping bias correction, and that historical occurrences of high O3 are better represented in simulations when multiple initial conditions are used. The analysis reveals that climate sensitivity in models may play a role as important as that of GHG emissions scenario in projections of mid-century climate change impacts, while GHG emissions have a stronger influence on simulated impacts on high O3 by the end of the 21st century.
Under unconstrained GHG emissions, 1-year O3 return levels are projected to increase by 4.5 ppb on average over the U.S. by mid-century under a high climate sensitivity, while a lower climate sensitivity lessens this impact to below 2 ppb, highlighting the importance of uncertain earth system response in simulations of climate change impacts on air quality. GHG emissions reductions limit the impacts of climate change on 1-year O3 in the simulation ensemble to less than 1 ppb, regardless of climate sensitivity. Further, the simulation ensemble suggests that, in the absence of O3 precursor emissions, projected increases in the frequency of high O3 occurrences under a moderate emissions scenario (P4.5) and climate sensitivity at the middle of the IPCC Sixth Assessment Report's likely range (3.0°C) (IPCC, 2021) could bring 8.5 million U.S. residents into non-compliance with existing air quality standards. The analysis signals that variability in ground-level O3 concentrations will likely increase under climate change in addition to projected changes to mean concentrations, resulting in more intense and more frequent high O3 episodes.
This study highlights the role climate sensitivity plays in contributing uncertainty to assessments of climate change's impact on air quality, particularly in projections of elevated pollution events. However, assumptions of bias stationarity and fixed clustering introduce uncertainty that extends to the extreme value analysis (Maraun et al., 2017). An assumption of stationary bias may be a reasonable procedure for large scale mean climate states (Krinner & Flanner, 2018), but its reliability is less clear for O3 projections. While we cannot ensure complete robustness of the bias correction and clusters to future changes, the analysis presented here and our results' broad consistency with similar studies (Rieder et al., 2015, 2018; Schnell et al., 2016; Shen et al., 2016) impart confidence that these choices have not introduced spurious climate signals. Further advancements to bias correction methods, such as process-based and neural-network techniques, remain as promising research directions (Liu et al., 2022; Maraun et al., 2017).
The potential for climate change to affect occurrence of high ozone pollution events is of relevance to air quality management in the U.S., particularly in regions with concentrations near the O3 NAAQS level, where small changes to the frequency and severity of high O3 episodes can compromise attainment. Attainment of O3 standards is estimated to lead to significant public health benefits, such as 160,000 avoided asthma attacks in children per year (U.S. EPA, 2015b). The simulation ensemble examined can provide policy-relevant insights into climate-induced impacts on high ozone events and associated consequences of climate policy implementation. While the projections suggest that policies curbing GHG emissions can support efforts to improve air quality by constraining the climate penalty on high O3 pollution, they also reveal increased risks to public health and attainment of air quality policy goals, derived from uncertainty in climate system response and natural variability.
In addition to climate impacts, air quality policies will strongly influence future O3 pollution (Eastham et al., 2023). Our ensemble with a single model and constant precursor emissions is not designed to explore the relationships among different climate model responses alongside precursor emissions changes. Model intercomparisons with multiple emissions pathways such as the Coupled Model Intercomparison Project Phase 6 (CMIP6), which show that changing precursor emissions will strongly influence future surface O3, may be able to address this question (Szopa et al., 2021; Turnock et al., 2020). Recent attention has been given to the advances enabled by large ensembles in climate and climate change impacts modeling (e.g., Deser et al., 2020; Fiore et al., 2022; Lehner et al., 2020; Mankin et al., 2020). This study further supports the use of multiple initializations in simulations linking climate and chemistry by showing that, compared to a single simulation, initial condition ensembles reduce errors in modeled high O3 pollution and increase confidence in projections. This analysis shows that projected impacts of climate on air quality depend, in large part, on climate sensitivity. Given that climate model response is a product of the process representations, parameterizations, and numerical methods included, it is important that assessments of climate change impacts on air quality consider the range of climate sensitivity possible and projections account for this uncertainty as is done for other variables (e.g., global temperature; Hausfather et al., 2022). Given the substantial costs and benefits of air quality regulations, adequately considering uncertainty in projections of atmospheric composition under climate change is critical to long-term air pollution mitigation efforts.
This analysis only considers a single climate model. However, the results of this study demonstrate that choosing a climate model with a high or low climate sensitivity has major implications for quantifying the O3 climate penalty on a regional level. Therefore, we encourage additional research on understanding the influence of climate sensitivity on the climate-O3 relationship, as our analysis shows it is likely a major driver of differences in existing O3 climate penalty estimates.
Acknowledgments
James D. East was supported, in part, by an appointment to the Research Participation Program at the Office of Research and Development, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, administered by the Oak Ridge Institute for Science and Education through an interagency agreement between the U.S. Department of Energy and the EPA. Rebecca K. Saari acknowledges funding by the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada RGPIN-2023-03807.
Open Research
Supporting Information
References
Volume12, Issue6
June 2024
e2023EF003941
This article also appears in:
Climate Change, Global Air Quality, and Society
Figures
References
Related
Information
Download PDF
Back to Top
© 2024 American Geophysical Union
AGU PUBLICATIONS
AGU.ORG
AGU MEMBERSHIP
Author Resources
Contact AGU
Editor Searches
Librarian Resources
Media Kits
Publication Award
Publication Policies
Scientific Ethics
Submit a paper
Usage Permissions
Additional links
ABOUT WILEY ONLINE LIBRARY
Privacy Policy
Terms of Use
About Cookies
Manage Cookies
Accessibility
Wiley Research DE&I Statement and Publishing Policies
HELP & SUPPORT
Contact Us
Training and Support
DMCA & Reporting Piracy
OPPORTUNITIES
Subscription Agents
Advertisers & Corporate Partners
CONNECT WITH WILEY
The Wiley Network
Wiley Press Room
Copyright © 1999-2024 John Wiley & Sons, Inc or related companies. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence technologies or similar technologies.