Your privacy, your choice
We use essential cookies to make sure the site can function. We, and our 209 partners, also use optional cookies and similar technologies for advertising, personalisation of content, usage analysis, and social media.
By accepting optional cookies, you consent to allowing us and our partners to store and access personal data on your device, such as browsing behaviour and unique identifiers. Some third parties are outside of the European Economic Area, with varying standards of data protection. See our privacy policy for more information on the use of your personal data. Your consent choices apply to nature.com and applicable subdomains.
You can find further information, and change your preferences via 'Manage preferences'.
You can also change your preferences or withdraw consent at any time via 'Your privacy choices', found in the footer of every page.
We use cookies and similar technologies for the following purposes:
Store and/or access information on a device
Personalised advertising and content, advertising and content measurement, audience research and services development
Accept all cookies
Reject optional cookies
Manage preferences
Skip to main content
Advertisement
View all journals
Search
Log in
Explore content
About the journal
Publish with us
Sign up for alerts
RSS feed
nature npj climate and atmospheric science articles article
Article
Open access
Published: 31 May 2024
Complexities of peroxyacetyl nitrate photochemistry and its control strategies in contrasting environments in the Pearl River Delta region
Tao Liu, Yu Wang
, Huang Cai, Hao Wang, Chunlin Zhang, Jun Chen, Yan Dai, Wenlong Zhao, Jiangyong Li
, Daocheng Gong, Duohong Chen, Yuhong Zhai, Yan Zhou, Tong Liao & Boguang Wang 
npj Climate and Atmospheric Science
 7, Article number: 116 (2024) Cite this article
500 Accesses
1 Altmetric
Metrics
Abstract
Peroxyacetyl nitrate (PAN) is a hazardous secondary pollutant and a nitrogen reservoir in the troposphere, while comprehensive studies on its spatiotemporal distribution, chemical sources, and control strategies are limited. This study addressed these issues based on 1-year multi-site observations in the Pearl River Delta region, showing a pattern of higher PAN levels in the cold season, particularly in coastal areas. Moreover, in situ modeling indicated a net photochemical PAN formation in the warm season, while PAN was dominated by regional transport in the cold season (i.e., rural and coastal areas), releasing NO2 and PA radicals and promoting ozone (O3) formation. In addition, the feasibility of joint control of PAN and O3 was confirmed by their isopleth diagrams. C7–C9 aromatics and C4–C5 alkenes, largely from vehicle exhaust and solvent usage, were identified as the predominant contributors to PAN formation in this region. Overall, this study deepens our understanding of PAN chemistry and provides valuable insights into its control measures.
Similar content being viewed by others
Seasonality and reduced nitric oxide titration dominated ozone increase during COVID-19 lockdown in eastern China
Article Open access
28 March 2022
Ozone pollution mitigation strategy informed by long-term trends of atmospheric oxidation capacity
Article 27 November 2023
A two-pollutant strategy for improving ozone and particulate air quality in China
Article 14 October 2019
Introduction
Peroxyacetyl nitrate (PAN, CH3C(O)OONO2) is a component of photochemical smog1,2 and exhibits detrimental effects on both human health3,4,5,6,7 and plant growth8,9,10,11. As a secondary product, PAN is formed through the reaction of nitrogen dioxide (NO2) with peroxyacetyl (PA) radical, the oxidated product of volatile organic compounds (VOCs)12,13,14,15,16. Unlike ozone (O3) formation contributed by various VOCs and oxygenated VOCs (OVOCs), only certain species such as acetaldehyde (CH3CHO) and methylglyoxal (MGLY) can be oxidized to generate PA radicals. These OVOCs are derived from primary emissions and oxidation of VOCs, particularly aromatics and isoprene7,14,15,17,18. In contrast to the photochemical production of PAN, its predominant sink is thermal decomposition7,14,19,20. The net formation of PAN usually occurs in polluted areas, from where it can be transported to relatively clean areas to decompose PA and NO221,22,23,24,25. In this regard, PAN can also be interpreted as a nitrogen reservoir that regulates the NOx (= NO + NO2) cycle in various environments7,26,27.
PAN was, for the first time, synthesized by Edward Schuck and George Doyle in 1959 to investigate the photochemical smog in Los Angeles16,28. After that, extensive analyses of the distribution and source of PAN were carried out in Europe29,30,31, Asia32,33,34, North America16,35,36, and other regions based on the methods of field measurements and model simulations26,37,38,39. In China, the measurements of PAN were reported in many cities (summarized in Supplementary Table 1), such as Beijing (0.31–1.9 ppbv, scale of averages in different studies)40,41,42,43, Hong Kong (0.48–0.69 ppbv)6, Guangzhou (0.31 ppbv)39, Lanzhou (0.76 ppbv)44, Ziyang (0.55 ppbv)45, Jinan (1.89 ppbv)46, Xiamen (0.55 ppbv)47, Shanghai (0.7–1.3 ppbv)48, Zhengzhou (1.24–3.04 ppbv)9, and Shenzhen (0.54 ppbv)49, while most studies were conducted at a single site in a short period (about 1–3 months) in different seasons, which might not present a systematic spatiotemporal characters of PAN. Although the studies in Shenzhen49, Shanghai48, and Zhengzhou9 analyzed the seasonal changes of PAN (Supplementary Table 1), its spatial variations in contrasting environments were not provided.
Apart from PAN observations, the nonlinear relationship between PAN formation and its precursors (i.e., VOCs and NOx) was also examined in previous studies. PAN formation was firstly determined as VOCs-limited through relative incremental reactivities (RIR) analysis at a rural site (Backgarden site) in the Pearl River Delta (PRD) region39 and at an urban site (China Meteorological Administration site) in Beijing11, while later research found that PAN formation was generally controlled by both NOx and VOCs in suburban and rural areas7,14,50. Although the RIR values of VOC species were further testified by Xue et al.18, demonstrating that the PAN production can be attributed to relatively few species, including xylene, trimethylbenzene, trans/cis-2-butene, toluene, and propene18, the exact contributions of these species to PAN formation were not quantified. Furthermore, the formation pathways of PAN were analyzed in previous studies, showing that PAN was mainly derived from CH3CHO, MGLY, other OVOCs, and radicals7,14,18. However, few studies specifically described the completed formation pathways from VOCs or OVOCs to PAN. Although Wang et al. quantified the VOCs-OVOCs-PAN process in a mountainous background area in southern China, the detailed formation processes of PAN in urban and rural areas remain elusive24. In addition, research on control strategies of O3 was well-developed, with studies focusing on O3 isopleth diagram51,52,53 and the contribution of VOC species54,55,56 and their sources to O3 formation54,55,57. However, similar studies on PAN are scarce, leading to a lack of its control strategies. Considering the net photochemical PAN formation nowadays was found not only in urban areas7,15 but also in polluted suburban7,14, rural50, and even remote24,25 areas, control strategies for PAN formation should be evaluated in different environments.
To address these research questions, one-year multi-site observations of PAN and its precursors in the PRD region were conducted to clarify the spatiotemporal variations of PAN in contrasting environments (i.e., inland rural, inland urban, and coastal urban areas). Furthermore, the photochemical processes of local PAN production were simulated using a photochemical box model with a master chemical mechanism (PBM–MCM). In addition, with the comparison between PAN and O3 isopleth diagrams, the coordinated control strategies of PAN and O3 were provided. At last, VOC sources were apportioned using the Positive-Matrix Factorization (PMF) model and the specific contributions of VOC sources to PAN formation were determined. The comprehensive studies deepen our understanding of the spatiotemporal variations of PAN photochemistry and provide insight into its sources and possible reduction strategies.
Results and discussion
Spatiotemporal variations of PAN and its precursors
The monthly variations of temperature, PAN and its precursors from June 2020 to May 2021 are shown in Supplementary Fig. 1. The monthly averaged values of temperature between June and September in 2020 (defined as the warm season) were comparable (t-test, p > 0.1), and were significantly higher (p < 0.05) than those in other months (October 2020 to May 2021, defined as the cold season). Meanwhile, the mixing ratios of PAN at three types of sites in the warm season were significantly lower (p < 0.05) than those in the cold season. PAN precursors also showed differences in warm and cold seasons. Therefore, further analyses were divided into warm and cold seasons to present the temporal variations.
Figure 1 shows the mixing ratios of PAN, Ox (= O3 + NO2), and their precursors in warm and cold seasons, and their values of each site are listed in Supplementary Table 2. In the warm season, the highest averaged PAN was found in inland rural areas (TH and BL site, 0.46 ± 0.04 ppbv, ±95% confidence interval). As the southwest monsoon prevailed in the warm season, the secondary pollutants (i.e., PAN and O3) at southern sites were diluted by dominated maritime air masses (Fig. 2a), resulting in lower mixing ratios of PAN in inland urban (HGS and ZML site, 0.29 ± 0.04 ppbv) and coastal urban (MH site, 0.27 ± 0.04 ppbv) areas. In addition, no significant difference (p = 0.2) was found between the southern inland and coastal urban sites, likely confirming the dilution effect on these sites in the warm season. It should be noteworthy that the dilution affects both primary (i.e., PAN precursors) and secondary (i.e., PAN and Ox) pollutants. Since the precursors have persistent anthropogenic and biogenic emission sources, while secondary pollutants have no primary emission source, the dilution effect of clear maritime air masses on secondary pollutants is more obvious.
Fig. 1: Comparisons of PAN and its precursors during warm and cold seasons at inland rural (IR), inland urban (IU), and coastal urban (CU) sites.
Note: The VOCs were represented by VOCs reactivities with OH. Error bars are the 95% confidence interval of the averages.
Full size image
Fig. 2: Spatial distributions of air masses arriving at MH site.
Backward trajectories and average levels of PAN and RVOCs of each air mass in warm (a) and cold (b) seasons are from June 2020 to May 2021. Note: The percentage represents the proportion of each cluster of trajectories.
Full size image
Conversely, during the cold season, the mixing ratio of PAN at coastal urban sites (2.46 ± 0.10 ppbv) was significantly higher (p < 0.01) than those at inland rural (1.46 ± 0.09 ppbv) and inland urban (1.14 ± 0.23 ppbv) sites, which might be due to regional transport of inland pollutants under the northeast monsoon in the cold season (Fig. 2b), resulting in a high level of PAN and Ox at a downwind coastal site.58,59 To confirm the regional transport, polar contour plots of PAN with wind speed and direction in inland urban (HGS site) and coastal urban (MH site) areas in the cold season were compared (Supplementary Fig. 3). High levels of PAN tended to occur at inland urban site when wind speed was lower than 2 m s−1, implying local PAN formation at this site, while it appeared at coastal urban site from north wind with speed higher than 2 m s−1, indicating the regional transport of PAN from northern part. Further comparison on diurnal variations of PAN at five sites found that observed PAN at coastal urban site (MH site) was significantly enhanced and delayed about 1–2 h compared with those at inland urban/rural sites, verifying the influence of regional transport on ambient PAN in coastal urban areas in the cold season (Supplementary Fig. 4).
Compared with PAN, NOx, and VOCs presented different spatiotemporal variations. In general, both VOCs reactivities with OH (i.e., RVOCs, see Supplementary Note for details) and NOx at inland urban sites were the highest in warm (RVOCs: 5.55 ± 0.38 s−1, NOx: 8.06 ± 0.22 ppbv) and cold (RVOCs: 5.16 ± 0.19 s−1, NOx: 16.91 ± 0.53 ppbv) seasons, due to their continuous highly local emissions. In contrast, NOx and anthropogenic VOCs (AVOCs, including 55 VOC species) with OH (RAVOCs) were lower at inland rural sites, where the impacts of anthropogenic emissions are weakened. In the warm season, biogenic VOC (BVOC, i.e., isoprene) reactivities with OH (RBVOC) were high at inland rural sites and inland urban sites since these sites are surrounded by large vegetation coverage (Fig. 9), leading to high biogenic emissions. Higher RBVOC at inland urban sites was probably due to the more intensive isoprene emission caused by higher temperatures in urban areas, which can be seen from correlations between isoprene and temperature in Supplementary Fig. 2.
Compared with inland sites, coastal urban site had the lowest RAVOCs and RBVOC in the warm season, mainly due to the stronger dilution effect of maritime air masses on coastal areas. This can be confirmed by the much lower level of PAN (0.2 ppbv) and RVOCs (~1.5 s−1) from maritime air masses compared to those from inland air masses (PAN: 2.15 ppbv and RVOCs: 3.56 s−1) in the