Register
Login
Portal home
Articles
About
Submit and review
Members and partners
Help and contact
Home Archives Vol. 58 No. 3 (2024): OENO One Original research articles
ORIGINAL RESEARCH ARTICLES
Investigation of aroma carryover risk in a pilot plant and on industrial scale when bottling aromatised and subsequent regular wines on the same filling line
Jörg Gottmann, David Müller, Jochen Vestner, Jens Schuster, Ulrich Fischer
Vol. 58 No. 3 (2024): OENO One
Received : 3 January 2024; Accepted : 4 June 2024; Published : 5 July 2024
DOI: https://doi.org/10.20870/oeno-one.2024.58.3.7931
ARTICLE
AUTHORS
SUPPLEMENTARY DATA
METRICS
Abstract
Aromatised wine-based beverages and regular wines are commonly bottled on the same bottling line. Sealings installed in the bottling line absorb added aroma compounds from the aromatised wine-based beverages and a subsequent release of the absorbed aroma compounds from the sealings was monitored during cleaning sequences and in subsequent products. Such unintentional carryover is associated with the risk of violating the legal ban of any aromatisation of regular wine. If cleaning is carried out according to good manufacturing practice (GMP) and traces of aroma compounds in the subsequently bottled wine show no sensory significance, this unintended aroma carryover will be considered by the German Federal Ministry of Nutrition and Agriculture as technically unavoidable and has no legal consequences. The risk of aroma absorption and aroma carryover have been investigated in different foods (orange juice, milk, and wine) and simulated in model systems using a beaker, but no real bottling scenario had been investigated till now.
To fill the knowledge gap we investigated the potential aroma carryover in a pilot plant, and in two different wineries during three bottlings of aromatised wine-based beverages and subsequent regular sparkling wine. Monitoring of installed sealings revealed the uptake of seven aroma compounds and further release of aroma compounds during a recommended cleaning sequence and subsequent contact with wine. A sensory significant aroma carryover into the subsequent wine that had been circulating for 24 hours in the pilot plant was observed only for α-ionone, which exceeded its odour detection threshold in white wine after 8 hours. Regarding the three bottlings of aromatised wine-based beverages and the subsequent sparkling wine, we recorded the uptake of γ-decalactone, eugenol, and trans-cinnamaldehyde in the sealings, and their further diminishment during the implemented cleaning of the wineries and subsequent bottling of a sparkling wine. During the short residence time of the product in the bottling line, no sensory and analytical differentiation of the pre-bottled and bottled sparkling wines was observed.
Introduction
The much-discussed risk of aroma carryover from aromatised wine-based beverages such as mulled wines into regular wines bottled later on the same filling line, and the possible associated legal consequences, represent a risk for small wineries in particular (Vetter, 2012; LUA, 2014; BMEL, 2019; Beierle et al., 2020; Freund, 2022). These wineries may not be able to afford a second filling line reserved for bottling mulled wine once a year, or ensure the high industrial standards associated with cleaning-in-place (CIP) procedures requiring high temperatures of cleaning agents, or they may lack knowledge of the risk of aroma carryover during the bottling of aromatised wines.
In case of wine, even the unintentional carryover of aroma compounds from aromatised wine-based beverages to regular wine has legal consequences. Aroma addition to wine is not listed in the European regulation No 2019/934, which lists the allowed oenological procedures, and is consequently prohibited (European Parliament, 2019). Sensory conspicuous wines are analytically examined by food control authorities to confirm aroma addition. Aromatisation is usually done with synthetic aroma concentrates containing, among other compounds, chiral aroma compounds in a racemic ratio (50:50), enabling evidence of fraud to be detected via enantioselective analysis (Mosandl, 2004; Langen et al., 2013; Lampe, 2015; Langen et al., 2016). However, realistically, given the continuous analytical progress,aroma carryover will become increasingly detectable and will be measured more frequently in the future. Therefore, the German Association of the Flavour Industry (Deutscher Verband der Aromenindustrie, DVAI) stated that any analytical detection in subsequently bottled products should not necessarily be equated with an active addition, and consequently should not per se be accompanied by a complaint or devaluation of the product. Moreover, they suggest that further factors are required to assess a complaint, such as the respective influence of the carried over aroma compounds on the product (DVAI, 2016). In 2019 the German Federal Ministry of Nutrition and Agriculture (Bundesministerium für Ernährung und Landwirtschaft, BMEL) developed in cooperation with food control authorities and the wine industry, a guideline for the precaution and evaluation of aroma carryover in wine bottling. Aroma compounds that are analytically suspicious but have no sensory significance for the bottled wine are treated as technically unavoidable (BMEL, 2019). Sensory significance can be evaluated using the odour detection thresholds (OTs) of individual aroma compounds. The values of OTs depend on the selected matrix and can vary by up to four orders of magnitude. To evaluate sensory significance in our previous study we recommended the use of OTs determined in wine (Gottmann et al., 2022b).
The generic absorption of aroma compounds into polymer materials such as food packaging is widely known as ‘scalping’ and impacts food quality (Arora et al., 1991; Licciardello et al., 2009; Wietstock et al., 2016). In case of reused packaging, the desorption of these absorbed aroma compounds from the polymer into later foods is known as carryover and can have a sensory impact (Nielsen, 1994; Safa and Bourelle, 1999). The excessive aroma addition in the range of mg/L in aromatised wine-based beverages facilitate high absorbance rates into sealing polymers in model experiments, which are associated with the high risk of carryover of nonpolar aroma compounds. Using a model system, we confirmed the high risk of carryover of nonpolar compounds, and showed an 8 % carryover of the initial concentration of the high nonpolar α-ionone into a subsequent model wine free of any initial α-ionone (Gottmann et al., 2021). A systematic incorporation of filling materials into ethylene propylene diene monomer rubber (EPDM), which is the most used sealing material in bottling lines, reduced the aroma absorption by at least 50 %. But even with the highly chemical resistant fluorine-based rubber (FKM), which reduced absorption by 85–99 %, overall absorption did not reach a value of zero (Gottmann et al., 2022a). FKM sealings are limited to static sealings and are significantly higher in price, which is why EPDM sealings are mostly used in bottling lines with many moving parts that require flexible sealings. The removal of absorbed aroma compounds during cleaning is a function of time, temperature and, mechanical work, as well as the chemical nature and concentration of the applied cleaning agents (Sinner, 1960; Tamime, 2009). Our previous study using a model system investigated different cleaning agents and temperatures based on the removal of absorbed aroma compounds from EPDM sealings. In agreement with the literature, no difference was shown among agents and only fractions of the absorbed aroma compounds were removed. Thus, the transfer of the remaining compounds from the sealing into regular wine cannot be prevented. The highest removal of absorbed compounds was achieved at the highest temperature of 85 °C and a cleaning time of 60 min (Elss et al., 2007; Eckstein, 2011; Vetter, 2012; LUA, 2014; Nishijima et al., 2014; Freund and Seckler, 2016; Gottmann et al., 2021).
Based on the numerous factors that potentially influence the bottling process, to date aroma carryover has only been investigated via simplified model systems using beakers and fixed volumes. A more practical approach was needed in order to investigate aroma carryover in a real-world scenario. This work aimed to expand on previously gained knowledge on aroma carryover using model systems to study the bottling of aromatised wines and regular wines on the same bottling line (Gottmann et al., 2021; Gottmann et al., 2022b; Gottmann et al., 2022a). Therefore, we designed a test pipeline to study installed commercial and customised DIN 11851 sealings with DN 50. First, aroma carryover was monitored under controlled conditions in a pilot plant. Second, potential aroma carryover was evaluated during the bottling of aromatised and regular wine at industrial scale in two wineries. The absorption and desorption of seven aroma compounds were monitored in this study: γ-decalactone, δ-decalactone, and γ-undecalactone (peach), ethyl 2-methylbutanoate (apple), α-ionone (raspberry), eugenol (clove-aroma), and trans-cinnamaldehyde (cinnamon). Previous studies have shown that these compounds occur at high concentrations in aromatised beverages (up to 37,8 mg/L) and control authorities analysed their presence in regular wine to detect any fraudulent aromatisation (Gottmann et al., 2022b). Furthermore, the sensory relevance of analytically determined concentrations of aroma compounds in the subsequent wines was evaluated within the promoted sensory concept.
Materials and methods
1. Chemicals
Aroma compounds were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich KGaA (Darmstadt, Germany) with purities as follows: ethyl 2-methylbutanoate (99 %), α-ionone (≥ 96 %), γdecalactone (≥ 98 %), δ-decalactone (≥ 98 %), γundecalactone (≥ 98 %), eugenol (99 %), and transcinnamaldehyde (≥ 99 %). Sodium hydroxide (98 %) and citric acid (99.5 %) were obtained from Merck KGaA (Darmstadt, Germany) and D-glucose (p.a.), D-fructose (> 99.5 %), L-tartaric acid (≥ 99 %), D-malic acid (≥ 99.5 %), L-lactic acid (≥ 95 %), sodium chloride (≥ 99 %), and glycerin (≥ 99 %) from Carl Roth GmbH + Co. KG (Karlsruhe, Germany). Ethanol (96 %) was purchased from Berkel AHK (Ludwigshafen, Germany).
2. Polymer materials
EPDM sealings according to DIN 11851 with DN 50 - also called dairy thread - were manufactured by the Institut für Kunststofftechnik Westpfalz (IKW) at the University of Applied Sciences, Kaiserslautern. The customised polymer material was composed of 100 parts per hundred rubber (phr) KEP 510 (Weber and Schaer, Hamburg, Germany), 150 phr kaolin “Kaoprime 11P“ as additive filling material (Thiele Kaolin Company, Sandersville, USA), 15 phr white oil from (WHC GmbH, Schweitenkirchen, Germany), 8 phr Peroxan DC (Thermo Fischer, Kandel, Germany), and 2 phr TAC-70 XP (Pergan, Bocholt, Germany). A commercial DIN 11851 EPDM sealing (70 EPDM 291) and an FKM sealing (75 Fluoroprene XP41) that had been optimised in terms of its aroma absorption by the supplier (Freudenberg, Weinheim, Germany) were used for comparison. The weight of the three investigated seals were as follows: 5.7 g per sealing for customised EPDM with kaolin, 4.6 g per sealing for EPDM (70 EPDM 291), 8.3 g per sealing for FKM (XP41). These commercial and more customised sealing materials were classified earlier in separate model study (Gottmann et al., 2022a).
3. Direct quantitation of absorbed aroma compounds in polymer material with TD-GC-MS
Thermal desorption coupled to gas chromatography and mass spectrometry (TD-GC-MS) enabled the direct analysation of ethyl 2-methylbutanoate, α-ionone, γ-decalactone, δ-decalactone, γ-undecalactone, eugenol and trans-cinnamaldehyde from sealings (Gottmann et al., 2021). The analytical system consisted of an Agilent 6890 GC equipped with an Agilent 5975 C MS, thermo desorption unit (TDU), cold injection system (CIS), and a multi-purpose sampler (MPS) provided by Gerstel (Mühlheim, Germany). For calibration, four stamped untreated polymer samples were placed in a TDU liner with glass wool, and 1 µL of each calibration standard solution (0.1–300 µg/g) was pipetted directly into the TDU liner. Calibration standards were prepared in methyl tert-butyl ether (MTBE). As an internal standard 3-methylbutyl acetate (9 µg/L) was added.
Separation of volatiles was achieved with a ZB-WAXplusTM column of 30 m × 0.25 mm internal diameter and 0.5 μm film thickness (Phenomenex, Germany). The oven program started at 40 °C for 2 min followed by a 3 °C/min increase to 60 °C. The temperature rose further by 20 °C/min until 180 °C was reached, followed by a slower increase of 5 °C/min up to 240 °C, which was maintained for 9 min. The total runtime was 35.6 min. The transfer line temperature was set to 250 °C and the helium carrier gas flow rate was constant at 1.2 mL/min. The MS was operated in electron impact ionisation mode with an electron energy of 70 eV, the source temperature was set to 230 °C, and total ion chromatograms were recorded over m/z 30–300. The initial TDU temperature of 30 °C was held for 1 min and heated up at a rate of 720 °C/min to the final extraction temperature of 150 °C and kept constant for 30 min in splitless mode. The TDU transfer