Advertisement
All Content
All Proceedings
Unconventional Resources Technology Conference
SPE/AAPG/SEG Unconventional Resources Technology Conference
Advanced Search
Cart
Register
Sign In
HOME
LATEST CONFERENCE
ALL YEARS
OTHER PROCEEDINGS
VISIT URTEC
CITATION MANAGER
SPE/AAPG/SEG Unconventional Resources Technology Conference
June 17–19, 2024
Houston, Texas, USA
Day 1 Mon, June 17, 2024
Previous Paper
Next Paper
Practical Models for Computing CO2 Solubility in Brines with Complex Ions for Carbon Geo-Sequestration Applications
Gideon Gyamfi;
David Kwaku Danso;
Xiaoli Li
Paper presented at the SPE/AAPG/SEG Unconventional Resources Technology Conference, Houston, Texas, USA, June 2024.
Paper Number: URTEC-4033482-MS
https://doi.org/10.15530/urtec-2024-4033482
Published: June 17 2024
Cite
Share
Get Permissions
Abstract
Continued fossil fuel use significantly increases greenhouse gas emissions, particularly CO2, prompting active scientific efforts to mitigate this interference with the climate system. One prominent approach is Carbon Capture and Sequestration (CCS), which involves a comprehensive understanding of CO2 solubility under deep saline aquifers. However, sparse studies have delved into the real reservoir brine, consisting of complex salt ions. Also, few works have been done focusing on CO2 geo-sequestration applications. In this work, we develop a practical and robust CO2 solubility model that considers the effect of the ionic strength of multiple cations and anions in formation water with the temperature, pressure, and salinity up to 723 K, 200 MPa, and 13 molarity. The developed model's validation against available experimental data shows that, in recreating the solubility of CO2 in brine formation, the mean squared error is 5 × 10−5 and the R-squared is 0.96. in general, the Gradient Boosting Model ranks as the most accurate machine learning algorithm among the algorithms studied in this study.
Introduction
Reactive gases, like ozone and nitrous substances contribute to climate change but are short lived (Buis, 2019). On the other hand, carbon dioxide has distinct characteristics, once introduced into the atmosphere, it remains present for an extended duration, ranging from 300 to 1,000 years. Fifty percent of the rise in atmospheric carbon dioxide levels during the past 300 years has taken place after 1980, and 25% of it has occurred since 2000 (Buis, 2019)). Amidst the worldwide COVID-19 pandemic, the Global Carbon Project assessed a daily decrease of 17% in carbon dioxide emissions in April 2020 (Galina Hale, 2020). The global population exceeds 8 billion and continues to grow. Consequently, the world's energy consumption is also on the rise. Hence, there is an anticipated rise in carbon dioxide emissions, necessitating immediate action to reduce the amount of carbon dioxide emitted into the environment. Carbon Capture and Sequestration has been one of the promising ways to safely store CO2 in geological storage.
Keywords:
air emission, geologist, geology, complex reservoir, mineral, subsurface storage, social responsibility, solubility, sustainable development, enhanced recovery
Subjects:
Unconventional Production Facilities, Reservoir Characterization, Fluid Characterization, Improved and Enhanced Recovery, Unconventional and Complex Reservoirs, Storage Reservoir Engineering, Environment, Sustainability/Social Responsibility, Information Management and Systems, CO2 capture and management
This content is only available via PDF.
Copyright 2024, Unconventional Resources Technology Conference
You can access this article if you purchase or spend a download.
Sign in
Don't already have an account? Register
Personal Account
Username
Password
SIGN IN
Reset password
Register
Sign in via OpenAthens
Pay-Per-View Access $28.00
BUY THIS ARTICLE
Annual Article Package – 25
$225
BUY DOWNLOADS
Annual Article Package – 50
$400
BUY DOWNLOADS
View Your Downloads
Advertisement
View Metrics
Email Alerts
Proceedings Paper Activity Alert Alert
Latest Conference Proceeding Alert
Advertisement
Suggested Reading
Machine Learning accelerated Phase Flash Calculation for CO2–Brine System considering Capillarity Effect
24IPTC
Application of Cold CO 2 Injection in High Skin Factor Depleted Reservoirs: A Review
24GOTS
Exploring CO 2 -H 2 S Storage in Deep Saline Aquifers: A Case Study from an Offshore Gas Field in Malaysia. From Lab to Numerical Simulation.
24IPTC
Fluid Property Model for Carbon Capture and Storage by Volume-Translated Peng-Robinson Equation of State and Lohrenz-Bray-Clark Viscosity Correlation
22RCSC
Investigation on CO 2 Solubility for Safer CO 2 Storage: Experimental Study on the Effect of pH
23OTCB
Advertisement
Explore
Journals
Conferences
eBooks
Publishers
Connect
About Us
Contact Us
Content Alerts
SPE Member Pricing
Resources
Terms of Use
Privacy
Help
KBART
Engage
Subscribe
Advertise
  This site uses cookies. By continuing to use our website, you are agreeing to our privacy policy.
Accept