Open toolbar
Accessibility Tools
Increase Text
Decrease Text
Grayscale
High Contrast
Negative Contrast
Light Background
Links Underline
Readable Font
Reset
Sitemap
Skip to content
Schedule A Consultation | Call Now 1-866-379-8381

About
Team
Conditions
Treatments
Testimonials
Resources
Store
Contact
Can Medical Cannabis Help Gastric Cancer?
August 14, 2022 / Brio-Medical, Scottsdale AZ / No Comments
A gastric cancer diagnosis can come as a distressing surprise. However, treatment is available, and many patients go on to live happy, healthy lives. Some achieve their ideal outcome through traditional oncology and therapies like chemotherapy and radiation, while others look to alternative treatment options.
Ongoing research is shedding light on the potential of these unconventional treatments to slow, stop, and kill gastric cancer and other cancers. One such natural treatment is cannabis, a plant native to Central and South Asia with a long history of medicinal applications.
Gastric Cancer: An Overview
Gastric cancer – also known as stomach cancer – is cancer that forms in the lining of the stomach and is the fifth most common cancer and the third most common cause of cancer death worldwide.
The stomach is formed of five layers of tissue. The innermost layer of the stomach is called the mucosa, where gastric cancer begins. It then spreads through each successive layer, starting with the submucosa, then the muscle, the subserosa, and finally the serosa. In addition, gastric cancer can be classified according to where the disease has developed. Classifications include gastric antrum cancer and gastric cardia cancer.
Conventional treatments and therapies for gastric cancer include chemotherapy and surgery. However, these do not always meet clinical needs. Some gastric cancer cells are chemo-resistant, and half of the patients who have surgery report tumor recurrence. For these reasons, patients who have a gastric cancer diagnosis may seek alternative treatment pathways, one of which is cannabis.
How Does Cannabis Interact with Cancer?
Cannabis may have potential as a treatment for gastric cancer. It works on several levels to kill cancerous cells and alleviate the pain associated with cancer and conventional therapies.
Cutting off blood supply
Cancer cells multiply because they create vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF). This compound allows cancer cells to build new blood vessels that supply them with the oxygen they need to survive. Cannabis has been shown to inhibit VEGF, which may stop the tumor’s growth.
Triggering cell death
Cannabis can induce cell death, a phenomenon called apoptosis. In a healthy body, cells automatically remove themselves when they become damaged or are unable to function correctly. However, cancer cells do not perform this vital function. Instead, they continue to multiply and grow. By triggering apoptosis, cannabis may slow or stop cancer growth.
Stopping metastasis
Metastasis happens when cancer cells break off a tumor, travel through the body, and settle in another area. When metastasis occurs, cancer becomes more difficult to treat. Research in laboratory and animal trials has shown that THC and CBD – the primary cannabinoids in cannabis – have properties that may prevent metastasis.
Easing symptoms
Chemotherapy and other conventional cancer treatments have long lists of adverse side effects, including fatigue, pain, and nausea. These side effects are often experienced in addition to the general symptoms of cancer. Altogether, patients may endure a significant loss in quality of life. However, cannabis may effectively aid in easing cancer symptoms and its treatments.
Studies have shown that cannabis can help prevent or limit chemotherapy’s nausea and vomiting. Others have found that it can also lessen neuropathic pain caused by damaged nerves.
Who Can Benefit from Alternative Gastric Cancer Treatments?
A cancer diagnosis of any kind can bring up all sorts of feelings: anxiety, fear, anger, and confusion. Patients are faced with many decisions, some of which could significantly impact their health. Treatment options are one of these decisions, and some individuals choose to look to alternative and integrative medicine in lieu of or in addition to conventional therapies.
Conventional oncology is focused on killing or slowing cancer through force. It is not concerned with limiting the body’s toxicity, enhancing diet and nutrition, or regulating and strengthening the immune system. These fundamental elements of well-being are considered unessential, and the belief that drugs and medication alone are enough to cure a patient dominates in Western medicine.
In alternative oncology, however, individuals are viewed and treated holistically. That means the mind, body, and emotional and spiritual elements of a person are accounted for and addressed harmoniously. The goal is to restore the biological capabilities of the patient, particularly the immune system. For these reasons, almost any person living with cancer can benefit from alternative treatments.
Brio-Medical treats cancer patients with all types of cancer – gastric cancer included – at all stages of their journey. Some have undergone conventional oncology treatments, and others have not. The majority respond positively to leading-edge therapies and report improvements in their prognosis.
Determining how a specific individual will respond to alternative treatments such as cannabis is not always straightforward and depends on their overall health and lifestyle. Effectiveness can also be impacted by how suppressed the person’s immune system is from chemotherapy, radiation therapy, and other toxic treatments.
Are You Living with Gastric Cancer?
It is never too late to explore the potential of cannabis and other alternative treatment pathways. You do have options, and you are in control of your health.
At Brio-Medical, we leverage integrative treatment protocols that unite conventional and alternative modalities to enhance the biological performance of each patient. Our approach is holistic, natural, and deeply individualized.
If you would like to find out more about your treatment option, please contact our patient care coordinators today. They are more than happy to answer your questions and address your concerns.
References:
Blázquez, Cristina et al. “Cannabinoids inhibit the vascular endothelial growth factor pathway in gliomas.” Cancer research vol. 64,16 (2004): 5617-23. doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-03-3927
Chakravarti, Bandana et al. “Cannabinoids as therapeutic agents in cancer: current status and future implications.” Oncotarget vol. 5,15 (2014): 5852-72. doi:10.18632/oncotarget.2233
Kiyokawa, Takashi, and Takeo Fukagawa. “Recent trends from the results of clinical trials on gastric cancer surgery.” Cancer Communications (London, England) vol. 39,1 11. 27 Mar. 2019, doi:10.1186/s40880-019-0360-1
Liu, Jun-Bao et al. “Chemo-resistant Gastric Cancer Associated Gene Expression Signature: Bioinformatics Analysis Based on Gene Expression Omnibus.” Anticancer research vol. 39,4 (2019): 1689-1698. doi:10.21873/anticanres.13274
Smyth, Elizabeth C et al. “Gastric cancer.” Lancet (London, England) vol. 396,10251 (2020): 635-648. doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(20)31288-5
Wang, Shiqi et al. “Postoperative complications and prognosis after radical gastrectomy for gastric cancer: a systematic review and meta-analysis of observational studies.” World journal of surgical oncology vol. 17,1 52. 18 Mar. 2019, doi:10.1186/s12957-019-1593-9
Zhang, Xin et al. “Cannabidiol Induces Cell Cycle Arrest and Cell Apoptosis in Human Gastric Cancer SGC-7901 Cells.” Biomolecules vol. 9,8 302. 25 Jul. 2019, doi:10.3390/biom9080302
  Meet the Author
Brio-Medical, Scottsdale AZ
Medical Director At Brio-Medical | (480) 680-0241 | About Brio-Medical
Brio-Medical, Scottsdale AZ, is a natural, holistic, and integrative expert in the cancer field. He is the medical director at Brio Medical, a holistic, integrative cancer healing center in Scottsdale, Arizona. Brio-Medical received his Bachelor of Arts from Louisiana Tech University and his Doctor of Medicine from LSU Health Sciences Center. He is Board Certified in Obstetrics and Gynecology and served as the Chief Resident in Obstetrics and Gynecology at the University of Tennessee. Brio-Medical is a Fellow in Functional and Regenerative Medicine, is a medical Advisor for NEO7 Bioscience and has been named as the President of the North American Society of Laser Therapy Applications (NASLTA).
Posts navigation
← 10 Benefits of Ozone Therapy for Cancer
Trailer: PRACTICING with Brio-Medical, AZ →
Related Posts
Join Us for the Cancer Breakthrough Summit 2.0
By Dr. Sean Devlin, DO, FAARFM, ABAARM | July 3, 2024
Join Us for the Cancer Breakthrough Summit 2.0 Event Calendar Prelaunch: June 25 – July 8, 2024 (best time to promote) Event: July 9 – […]
Holistic Therapy for Cancer: Integrated Care Approach
By Brio-Medical, Scottsdale AZ | January 3, 2024
At [Your Company Name], we believe in providing holistic therapy for cancer that takes an integrated care approach. Our goal is to combine natural remedies […]
Exploring Alternative Cancer Medicine Options
By Brio-Medical, Scottsdale AZ | January 3, 2024
At [Company Name], we understand that individuals facing a cancer diagnosis often seek holistic approaches to complement their standard treatment. Many people are interested in […]
Natural Treatments for Breast Cancer – Our Insights
By Brio-Medical, Scottsdale AZ | January 3, 2024
Breast cancer is a common and serious disease affecting women worldwide. While medical treatments such as chemotherapy, radiation, and surgery are commonly prescribed, there is […]
Holistic Treatment for Colon Cancer Options
By Brio-Medical, Scottsdale AZ | January 3, 2024
When it comes to treating colon cancer, a comprehensive and holistic approach can provide valuable support alongside conventional treatments. Holistic treatment for colon cancer focuses […]
Exploring the Best Alternative Cancer Treatments
By Brio-Medical, Scottsdale AZ | January 3, 2024
At Brio-Medical Cancer Clinic, we understand that many cancer patients are interested in exploring alternative treatment options. That’s why we are dedicated to providing comprehensive […]
Posted in Gastric Cancer
Posts navigation
← 10 Benefits of Ozone Therapy for Cancer
Trailer: PRACTICING with Brio-Medical, AZ →
Leave a Comment
Your email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *
Type here..
Name*
Email*
Website




Brio-Medical
Cancer Clinic
11000 N Scottsdale Rd Suite 115
Scottsdale, Arizona, USA

+1-866-379-8381
Clinic Hours of Operation
Monday 9:00 AM — 5:00 PM
Tuesday 9:00 AM — 5:00 PM
Wednesday 10:00 AM — 5:00 PM
Thursday 9:00 AM — 5:00 PM
Friday 9:00 AM — 5:00 PM
Saturday Closed
Sunday Closed
Cancer Programs
Brain Cancer
Breast Cancer
Colon Cancer
Leukemia
Lung Cancer
Non-Hodgkin Lymphoma
Ovarian Cancer
Pancreatic Cancer
Prostate Cancer
Cancer Treatments
Low Dose Chemo
Whole Body Hyperthermia
EBOO/ RHP
Methylene Blue Therapy
Curcumin Therapy
Mistletoe Therapy
Ozone Therapy
HOCATT Ozone Sauna
Weber Laser
Patient Resources
Schedule A Consultation
Brio-Medical, AZ MD, MDH
Meet the Brio-Medical Team
Financial Resources
Insurance Billing Policy
Brio-Essentials Supplements
Patient Testimonials
Traveling to Scottsdale, AZ
XML Sitemap
HTML Sitemap
Privacy Policy
Terms of Use
Terms & Conditions
DMCA
Impressum
Disclaimer
Cookie Policy
FDA Disclaimer
HIPPA Compliance Policy
Accessibility Policy
AI Disclaimer
Copyright © 2019-2024 | Brio-Medical | All rights reserved