RUcore: Rutgers University Community Repository
Search
Services
Collections
Help Contact Us My Account
Home
Resource
Selected item
          A platform for duckweed production: improving and testing the duckweed production module (DPM®)
PDF
Access to this PDF has been restricted at the author's request. It will be publicly available after May 28, 2025.
Request a Copy
Citation & Export
View Usage Statistics
Staff View
Description
TitleA platform for duckweed production: improving and testing the duckweed production module (DPM®)
NameSorrels, Shawn (author); Lam, Eric (chair); Both, A.J. (member); Chou, Ming Yi (member); Rutgers University; School of Graduate Studies
Date Created2024
Other Date2024-05 (degree)
SubjectAgriculture engineering, Microbiology, Plant sciences, Duckweeds
Extent80 pages : illustrations
DescriptionDuckweed has the potential to be an environmentally and economically sustainable crop with commercial applications ranging from food and feed, wastewater treatment and environmental monitoring, biofuels and bioplastics, dietary supplements and pharmaceuticals, and integrated as a life support system for space exploration. Cultivation benefits of duckweed include clonal propagation, high growth rate, small plant size, and the ability to utilize the whole plant for most applications (no waste). However, efforts to cultivate duckweed in commercial settings have seen limited success due to the largely undomesticated nature of the plant. Abiotic and biotic parameters have not been defined and standardized, and optimal parameters may differ depending on the variety of duckweed cultivated. I hypothesize in this thesis that the benefits of duckweed cultivation are best realized in a controlled environment agriculture setting, using vertical towers to maximize biomass production. I show how system engineering improvements and growth media management, informed by testing and analysis of abiotic factors along with harvest yield measurements, may provide a path to successful commercialization of duckweed products and services. I also compare preliminary bacteria community profiling of two DPM® systems under disinfection (re-circulating aqueous ozone) and non-disinfection conditions to determine the extent of bacterial tissue colonization disruption due to ozone treatment (if any).
In Chapter 1, I discuss the engineering and abiotic improvements made over five years of trials. This included scaling the original Duckweed Production Module (DPM®) system from three to six trays and developing management protocols to increase harvest yield as well as increase the production duration per crop.
In Chapter 2, A culture-independent approach was used to generate bacterial community profiles from two DPMs, one with intermittent aqueous ozonation of re-circulating growth media, and one without aqueous ozone treatment. The community profiles were compared to test if aqueous ozone treatment would significantly alter the prevalence and relative abundance of bacterial taxa associated with duckweed tissue when compared to the untreated tissue. Colony Forming Unit (CFU) was also compared to test the efficiency of aqueous ozone to decrease total bacterial load.
In conclusion, this thesis provides evidence that duckweed can be cultivated long-term and harvest yield increased using a vertical multi-layered platform under controlled conditions when management protocols are developed and followed. Furthermore, this thesis profiles the bacterial community composition of duckweed grown in DPM® systems under two different conditions and describes the effects of aqueous ozonation on bacterial community diversity over time.
NoteM.S.
NoteIncludes bibliographical references
Genretheses
Persistent URLhttps://doi.org/doi:10.7282/t3-775g-1s43
LanguageEnglish
CollectionSchool of Graduate Studies Electronic Theses and Dissertations
Organization NameRutgers, The State University of New Jersey
RightsThe author owns the copyright to this work.
About Us
How does RUcore work?
Policies
Services
Participate in RUcore
Collections
Infrastructure
Trusted Repository
Preservation
Understanding Metadata
Technical Glossary
Developers
Reference Materials
Web Services/APIs
Schemas
Harvesting
Statistical Profile Version 8.5.8
Site Search Privacy Policy
libraries.rutgers.edu
Copyright ©2024 Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey(Further Copyright Information)