Product & Services
Subscribe
Submit a paper
Browse
Rankings
Blog↗
Contact
Create account
Sign in
  This is a preprint article, it offers immediate access but has not been peer reviewed.
Download This Paper
Open PDF in Browser
Add Paper to My Library
Share:
Application of an Ozone-Activated Peroxymonosulfate Process to Effective Degradation of Tetramethylammonium Hydroxide (Tmah) in Semiconductor Wastewater
33 Pages Posted: 5 Jul 2024
Hyunki Jung
affiliation not provided to SSRN
Duksoo Jang
Hanbat National University
Jiyeon Jung
affiliation not provided to SSRN
Changha Lee
Seoul National University
Am Jang
Sungkyunkwan University
Abstract
This study used ozone-activated peroxymonosulfate (O3/PMS) to remove Tetramethylammonium hydroxide (TMAH) from artificial semiconductor wastewater. The rate constant for the O3/PMS process was approximately 14.4 times higher than that for the process employing O3 only, attributed to the explosive production of hydroxyl radicals (•OH) in the process, the contribution of which was confirmed using a scavenger test. The degradation efficiencies were the highest at pH 7.0 (1.80 × 10-2 min-1) and 40℃ (2.18 × 10-2 min-1). Alkalinity and humic acid, potent scavengers of •OH, significantly reduced the degradation of TMAH. Remarkably, removal efficiencies of 64.4% for TMAH and 43.7% for TOC were achieved at a relatively high initial concentration of 100 μM. However, approximately 27% of the nitrogen was converted to the final by-products NH4+ and NO3-, indicating that considerable nitrogen fragments remained as intermediates. Degradation pathways and intermediates were proposed based on the spectrometry data. Given that the toxicity of the demethylated intermediates was roughly 20‒30 times lower than that of TMAH, the acute toxicity to A. fischeri was reduced by approximately half (46.4±2.57%). The results of this study demonstrate the substantial potential of the O3/PMS process for treating wastewater containing TMAH.
Keywords: degradation, Ozone, Peroxymonosulfate, Tetramethyl ammonium hydroxide, Toxicity
Suggested Citation:
Jung, Hyunki and Jang, Duksoo and Jung, Jiyeon and Lee, Changha and Jang, Am, Application of an Ozone-Activated Peroxymonosulfate Process to Effective Degradation of Tetramethylammonium Hydroxide (Tmah) in Semiconductor Wastewater. Available at SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4886647 or http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.4886647






Download This Paper
Open PDF in Browser
61 References
Tel:+82-2-880-8630 . E-mail: leechangha@snu
** Corresponding Author , Tel
, p. 82 - 113
T.-K Kim , T Kim , I Lee , K Choi , K.-D Zoh
Removal of tetramethylammonium hydroxide (TMAH) in semiconductor wastewater using the nano-ozone H2O2 process
Journal of Hazardous Materials , volume 409 Posted: 2021
Z Li , L Ren , X Wang , M Chen , T Wang , R Dai , Z Wang
Anaerobic hydrolysis of recalcitrant tetramethylammonium from semiconductor wastewater: Performance and mechanisms
Journal of Hazardous Materials , volume 459 Posted: 2023
Load more
0 Citations
Do you have a job opening that you would like to promote on SSRN?
Place Job Opening
Paper statistics
DOWNLOADS
1
ABSTRACT VIEWS
9
61 References
PlumX Metrics
Feedback
Submit a Paper
Section 508 Text Only Pages
SSRN Quick Links
SSRN Solutions
Research Paper Series
Conference Papers
Partners in Publishing
Jobs & Announcements
Special Topic Hubs
SSRN Rankings
Top Papers
Top Authors
Top Organizations
About SSRN
Network Directors
Announcements
Contact us
FAQs
Copyright Terms and Conditions Privacy Policy
All content on this site: Copyright © 2023 Elsevier Inc., its licensors, and contributors. All rights are reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. For all open access content, the Creative Commons licensing terms apply.
We use cookies to help provide and enhance our service and tailor content.
To learn more, visit Cookie Settings.
We use cookies that are necessary to make our site work. We may also use additional cookies to analyze, improve, and personalize our content and your digital experience. For more information, see ourCookie Policy
Cookie Settings
Accept all cookies