Journals & Books
Help
Search
My account
Sign in
Access through your institution
Purchase PDF
Article preview
Abstract
Introduction
Section snippets
References (60)
Journal of Cleaner Production
Volume 468
, 25 August 2024, 143138
Comprehensive assessment of engineering and environmental attributes of geopolymer pervious concrete with natural and recycled aggregate
Author links open overlay panel
Wei Huang
,
Hao Wang
Show more
Add to Mendeley
Share
Cite
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2024.143138
Get rights and content
Abstract
This study aims to conduct comprehensive assessment of engineering and environmental attributes of geopolymer pervious concrete with natural and recycled aggregate. Pervious concrete mixtures were fabricated with different paste and aggregate types for laboratory characterization at different scales. As compared to traditional cement pervious concrete, mechanical strengths of geopolymer pervious concrete increase significantly when either natural coarse aggregate (NCA) or recycled concrete aggregate (RCA) is used. The replacement of NCA with RCA reduces concrete strength but the advantage of geopolymer pervious concrete is maintained. Micro-scale observations indicate that geopolymer pastes have better bonding to RCA. Life-cycle assessment (LCA) results show that the lower global warming potential (GWP) and eutrophication potential (EP), but the greater energy consumption (EC) and acidification potential (AP) are achieved by geopolymer-based pervious concrete. Photochemical ozone creation potential (POCP) is found greater for fly ash-based but smaller for metakaolin-based geopolymer pervious concrete. The use of RCA brings environmental benefit at raw materials and transportation stages, in addition to avoiding landfilling and preserving natural aggregate. The pervious concrete with metakaolin-based geopolymer achieves the best overall performance considering multi-criteria of strength and environmental indicators regardless of aggregate type.
Introduction
Pervious concrete pavement brings benefits in facilitating stormwater management and mitigating urban heat island due to its porous surface (Vaillancourt et al., 2019; Chen et al., 2019a). However, the high porosity of pervious concrete leads to relatively lower mechanical strength, which largely limits its applications on roadway surface with low traffic and light loads, such as parking lots and sidewalks (Najm et al., 2017, 2022).
Geopolymer based cementitious materials show promising applications in construction industry for engineering structure and additive manufacturing (Xiao et al., 2022; Raza and Zhong, 2022; Wu et al., 2019). As compared to Portland cement concrete, higher mechanical strengths (Bai et al., 2019, 2020; Huang and Wang, 2021; Mirmoghtadaei et al., 2023) and less greenhouse gas emissions (GHG) (Danish et al., 2022; Bajpai et al., 2020; Salas et al., 2018; Turner and Collins, 2013) can be achieved by geopolymer based concrete. The utilization of geopolymer for pervious concrete gains increased attentions in recent years. It has been reported that comparative or better mechanical strength, permeability, abrasion, and freezing-thawing resistance were attained for geopolymer based pervious concretes, while the carbon footprint was reduced by around 33–50% as compared to conventional pervious concrete made with Portland cement (Huang and Wang, 2022).
On the other hand, recycled concrete aggregate (RCA) is usually made of waste concrete from Construction and Demolition Waste (CDW) recycling plants. The utilization of RCA as aggregate to produce new concrete materials can help preserve natural aggregate resources and solve social and environmental problems (Makul et al., 2021). However, the environmental benefits of RCA were found varying in previous studies due to different assessment boundaries, locations, transportation distance and methods (Marinković et al., 2010; Hossain et al., 2016; Yazdanbakhsh et al., 2018). For example, 1.4%–3.8% reductions in GHG, photochemical ozone creation potential, human toxicity potential, and eutrophication potential were obtained for the use of RCA (Aman et al., 2022). The use of RCA may lead to ascended environmental benefits diverted from preserved natural aggregate resources and avoided landfill of large amount of CDW, which can be allocated to RCA to enlarge its environmental benefit (EN 15804, 2012; Silvestre et al., 2014). However, there were limitations that not all CDW could be used for producing well-graded coarse RCA (Yazdanbakhsh et al., 2018) and the converting rate from CDW to RCA was about 36%–60% (Nagataki et al., 2004).
It was reported that the mechanical strength of concrete incorporated with RCA decreased with the increase of RCA content (Liu et al., 2019). The compressive strength of pervious concrete was reduced by over 50% as the replacement ratio of RCA was 100%, which was mainly caused by the residual mortar adhered on RCA (Yap et al., 2018). The strength reduction due to RCA could be compensated by high strength and good bonding provided by geopolymer binders (Shi et al., 2012; Posi et al., 2013; Sata et al., 2013). It was found that only slight reduction of compressive and splitting tensile strength were observed for geopolymer concrete made with RCA, and the strength loss was further alleviated by increasing the sodium hydroxide concentration in geopolymer (Nuaklong et al., 2016).
The geopolymer based pervious concrete can present improved mechanical strength and lower environmental impacts than conventional cement based one (Huang and Wang, 2022). The incorporation of RCA in pervious concrete can bring increased environmental benefits but may result in strength reduction. To fully capture the influence of RCA on pervious concrete, this study aims to investigate the impact of RCA on mechanical properties and environmental impacts of geopolymer and cement based pervious concrete made with RCA. Compressive and tensile tests are conducted to evaluate mechanical properties of pervious concrete made with different binders and aggregates. Optical microscope and scanning electron microscope (SEM) are used to investigate surface morphology and interfacial transition zone (ITZ) between pastes and natural aggregate or RCA. On the other hand, a cradle-to-gate life-cycle assessment is applied to quantify multiple environmental impacts of different pervious concrete. The study is unique for illustrating both engineering performance and environmental impacts of geopolymer based pervious concrete made with RCA as compared to traditional pervious concrete.
Section snippets
Pervious concrete mix designs
Three types of aluminosilicate materials: metakaolin (MK), fly ash (FA), and granulated blast furnace steel slag (GBFS) were used as binder materials for the preparation of geopolymer based pervious concrete. Alkaline solution (AS) is made of sodium hydroxide and sodium silicate solution (37.1% solid), which is used as activator for geopolymer. The detailed preparation method of AS can be found in a previous study (Huang and Wang, 2022). Crushed recycled concrete (RCA) and natural coarse
Experimental test methods
The compressive strength test was conducted according to a standard of ASTM C39. The splitting tensile strength was conducted based on standard of ASTM C496. All test setups and failure specimens are shown in Fig. 1. The cylinder specimen for uniaxial compressive strength test was capped by two steel caps with rubber pad placed in. The splitting tensile test was conducted by putting the cylinder specimen within two wood shims with a convex steel bar set beneath.
The surface morphology of
Goal and scope of LCA
LCA is a systematic tool usually utilized to assess environmental effects associated within the life scope of concrete materials. The general processes of LCA are specified by International Organization for Standardization (ISO) 14044, including goal and scope definition, inventory data acquisition, impacts quantification and evaluation (ISO, 2006).
LCA is conducted to investigate the effects of geopolymer binders and recycled concrete aggregate on environmental impacts of pervious concretes.
Conclusions and recommendations
This study investigates multi-criteria performance of pervious concrete made with geopolymer binders and recycled concrete aggregate. The following conclusions can be concluded from experimental characterization and life-cycle assessment.
(1)
With NCA as aggregate, metakaolin- and fly ash-based geopolymer pervious concrete present 42% and 15% higher compressive strength, and 113% and 93% higher tensile strength than Portland cement-based one, respectively.
(2)
With RCA as aggregate, metakaolin- and fly
CRediT authorship contribution statement
Wei Huang: Writing – original draft, Methodology, Investigation, Formal analysis, Data curation. Hao Wang: Writing – review & editing, Supervision, Methodology, Conceptualization.
Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.
Acknowledgement
The authors acknowledge the help of Prof. Matthew Adams at New Jersey Institute of Technology by providing recycled concrete aggregate.
References (60)
T. Bai et al.
Performance evaluation of metakaolin geopolymer modified by different solid wastes
J. Clean. Prod.
(2019)
T. Bai et al.
Mechanical properties of metakaolin-based geopolymer with glass fiber reinforcement and vibration preparation
J. Non-Cryst. Solids
(2020)
R. Bajpai et al.
Environmental impact assessment of fly ash and silica fume based geopolymer concrete
J. Clean. Prod.
(2020)
A. Braga et al.
Compared environmental and economic impact from cradle to gate of concrete with natural and recycled coarse aggregates
J. Clean. Prod.
(2017)
C. Chen et al.
LCA allocation procedure used as an incitative method for waste recycling: an application to mineral additions in concrete
Resour. Conserv. Recycl.
(2010)
J. Chen et al.
Alleviating urban heat island effect using high-conductivity permeable concrete pavement
J. Clean. Prod.
(2019)
X. Chen et al.
Evaluating engineering properties and environmental impact of pervious concrete with fly ash and slag
J. Clean. Prod.
(2019)
A. Danish et al.
Sustainability benefits and commercialization challenges and strategies of geopolymer concrete: a review
J. Build. Eng.
(2022)
M. De Juan et al.
Study on the influence of attached mortar content on the properties of recycled concrete aggregate
Construct. Build. Mater.
(2009)
T. Ding et al.
A closed-loop life cycle assessment of recycled aggregate concrete utilization in China
Waste Manag.
(2016)
View more references
Cited by (0)
View full text
© 2024 Published by Elsevier Ltd.
Part of special issue
Innovative Valorization of Alternative Materials and Waste towards Circular Construction
Edited by Zhen Leng, Dept. of Civil & Environmental Eng. The Hong Kong Polytechnic University Hunghom, Kowloon Hong Kong, Chi-Sun Poon, Dept. of Civil and Environmental Engineering The Hong Kong Polytechnic University Air Quality Studies Hong Kong China, Baoshan Huang, Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering University of Tennessee 223 Perkins Hall Knoxville 37996 Tennessee USA, Shi-Jie Cao, Sch. of Architecture Southeast University Jinxianghe Road 35, Xuanwu Nanjing, Jiangsu 210096 China
View special issue
Recommended articles
Bohmian analysis of dark solutions in interfering Bose–Einstein condensates: The dynamical role of underlying velocity fields
Results in Physics, Volume 63, 2024, Article 107859
Jalal Tounli, Ángel S. Sanz
Community water debts in Colombia: financialisation from below?
Geoforum, Volume 154, 2024, Article 104049
Brendan Ecuyer
Numerical method of lateral pipe-soil interaction and sensitivity analysis investigation
Alexandria Engineering Journal, Volume 105, 2024, pp. 360-369
Chuan Wang, …, Min Lou
Show 3 more articles
About ScienceDirect
Remote access
Shopping cart
Advertise
Contact and support
Terms and conditions
Privacy policy
Cookies are used by this site.
Cookie Settings
All content on this site: Copyright © 2024 Elsevier B.V., its licensors, and contributors. All rights are reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. For all open access content, the Creative Commons licensing terms apply.
We use cookies that are necessary to make our site work. We may also use additional cookies to analyze, improve, and personalize our content and your digital experience. For more information, see ourCookie Policy
Cookie Settings
Accept all cookies