Journals
Books
Sign in through your institution
Issues
Advance articles
Submit
Alerts
About
Journal of Radiation Research
This issue
Biological Sciences
Radiology
Books
Journals
Oxford Academic
Advanced Search
Volume 65 Issue 4
July 2024
Article Contents
Abstract
INTRODUCTION
MATERIALS AND METHODS
RESULTS
DISCUSSION
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
CONFLICT OF INTEREST
FUNDING
ETHICS APPROVAL
DATA AVAILABILITY
References
Author notes
Supplementary data
< Previous
Next >
JOURNAL ARTICLE
Ozone enhances the efficacy of radiation therapy in esophageal cancer
Jiayou Guo,
Jiayi Guo,
Beibei Cheng,
Mengxiao Gong,
Xingbang Sun,
Hongwei Zhang,
Jianxin Ma
Author Notes
Journal of Radiation Research, Volume 65, Issue 4, July 2024, Pages 467–473, https://doi.org/10.1093/jrr/rrae041
Published: 06 June 2024 Article history
PDF
Split View
Cite
Permissions
Share
Abstract
Radioresistance is increasingly developed in esophageal cancer. Increasing radiation sensitivity can reduce the mortality of esophageal cancer. To investigate the effect and mechanism of ozone on the radiotherapy sensitization of esophageal carcinoma. KYSE150 cells were xenografted subcutaneously into nude mice and irradiated with 8 Gy radiation according to different subgroups (sham, radiation, ozone and radiation+ozone group (n = 10 per group)). Half of the mice were used to determine the body weight, tumor size and tumor weight. Half of the mice were used to collect peripheral blood. The serum was centrifuged to detect circulating cell-free DNA (cf-DNA), interleukin-6 (IL-6), interferon-γ (IFN-γ), myeloperoxidase (MPO)-DNA complexes, tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF-α), matrix metalloproteinase-9 (MMP-9) and hypoxia-inducible factor-1α (HIF-1α) using commercial kits. The levels of phosphorylation AMP-activated protein kinase (p-AMPK) and scavenger receptor-A (SR-A) were measured by immunocytochemistry and Western blotting in the tumor tissues of mice. Ozone alone or combined with radiation therapy significantly reduced the body weight, tumor volume and tumor weight of esophageal cancer compared to the sham group. The ELISA results showed that the levels of cf-DNA, IFN-γ, MPO-DNA complexes, TNF-α, IL-6, HIF-1α and MMP-9 in the peripheral blood of mice treated with ozone combined with radiation were significantly lower compared with the radiation group. Ozone, synergistically with radiation, significantly increased the protein expression of p-AMPK and SR-A. Ozone may increase the radiosensitivity of esophageal cancer by inhibiting neutrophil extracellular traps.
Issue Section: Fundamental Radiation Science
INTRODUCTION
In recent years, a gradual increase in the incidence rate has occurred in esophageal cancer [1]. It is estimated that there will be 957 000 new cases and 880 000 deaths by 2040 [2]. China accounts for ~54% of global diagnosed cases of esophageal cancer [1]. Surgery remains the preferred therapy for early esophageal squamous cell carcinoma patients. However, this cancer is usually prone to missed diagnosis early due to the unspecific symptoms, resulting in a 5-year survival rate of <20% [3]. For patients with advanced esophageal cancer, radiotherapy is the current standard treatment method, especially for esophageal squamous cell carcinoma [4]. However, the most important factor currently limiting the effectiveness of radiotherapy for advanced esophageal cancer is the formation of radiation-resistant cancer cells after repeated irradiation [5]. This makes radiotherapy unable to substantially improve the prognosis and long-term survival of esophageal cancer patients. Therefore, urgent needs are emerging to find new adjuvant treatments and mechanisms to prevent the development of radiation resistance.
Hypoxia and chronic inflammation are the core mechanisms leading to tumor progression and radiation resistance [6]. In advanced cancer, apoptosis, necrosis, and the release of numerous damage-associated molecular patterns (DAMPs) can induce activation of Toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4) in neutrophils and lead to the release of neutrophil nuclear contents, forming neutrophil extracellular trapping networks (NETs) [7]. NETs are a novel form of death that differs from apoptosis or even necrosis [8]. Instead, NETs play an important role in causing hypoxia and chronic inflammation in the tumor microenvironment [9]. NETs promote platelet adhesion, aggregation, activation and fibrin deposition, and initiate thrombus formation, leading to cell hypoxia [10]. Hypoxia can activate hypoxia-inducible factor 1α (HIF-1α), which is related to cellular activities, such as glucose metabolism balance, antioxidant factor release, vascular protection and regeneration [11]. Hypoxia enables cancer cells to acquire the ability to resist radiation [12]. Moreover, NETs can activate TLR4/9-COX2 signaling and then trigger tumor-related inflammation, cell death resistance or enhanced invasiveness or metastasis [13]. The pretreatment of inhibiting the adaptation of cancer cells to hypoxia is a promising method for resisting radiation resistance.
Medical ozone has the function of killing bacteria, promoting oxygen metabolism and activating the immune system [14]. It has been used to regulate inflammation and applied to treating wound healing, ischemic diseases, infections and chronic inflammatory diseases. Also, ozone has been found to be effective in the treatment of lumbar disc herniation, arthralgia, diabetes ulcers and chronic ulcerative colitis [15]. Previous data has indicated that ozone could protect animals from radiation-induced organ toxicity by increasing the endogenous antioxidant defense mechanism [16]. Ozonized oil nanoemulsions have been identified as radiosensitizers in B-16 melanoma and OV-90 ovarian cells in vitro [17]. The high-mobility group box 1 (HMGB1) protein is one of the core components of NETs [18]. Mechanically, ozone can upregulate the phagocytic effect of scavenger receptor A (SR-A) on HMGB1 by activating adenosine monophosphate-activated protein kinase (AMPK) and can also stimulate the inflammatory response by being recognized by inflammatory cells as DAMPs [19]. Therefore, ozone can reduce the activation of NETs at the source by reducing the already-formed NETs and by phagocytosing DAMPs, thus potentially becoming an effective sensitizer for tumor radiotherapy.
The purpose of this study was to investigate the potential sensitization effect of ozone in tumor radiotherapy. Here, we established a mouse xenograft tumor model of esophageal cancer to explore the potential mechanism of ozone-enhancing radio sensitization in vivo.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Reagents and materials
The esophageal cancer KYSE150 (#TCHu236) cell line was provided by the cell bank of the Chinese Academy of Sciences (Shanghai, China); PicoGreen® DsDNA Reagent (#P7589) is provided by Invitrogen (Life Technologies, Carlsbad, CA, USA). Ozone is generated by medical ozone treatment equipment (Ozomed Smart, Kastner-Praxisbedarf GmbH, Rastatt, Germany). Interleukin-6 (IL-6, #PD6050), interferon-γ (INF-γ, #QK285), tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF-α, #STA00D), matrix metalloproteinase-9 (MMP-9, #SMP900) and HIF-1α (#DYC1935-5) enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay kits were produced by R&D Systems (Minneapolis, USA). HIF-1α antibody (#3716) was purchased from Cell Signaling Technology (Danvers, USA). Roswell Park Memorial Institute (RPMI)-1640 culture medium (#ZQ-230) was from Zhong Qiao Xin Zhou Biotechnology (Shanghai, China). Rabbit anti-human phospho-AMPK (#5256) antibody was purchased from Cell Signaling Technology (Danvers, USA), while rabbit anti-mouse polyclonal to AMPK antibody (#ab194920) was purchased from Abcam (Cambridge, USA). Radio Immunoprecipitation Assay Lysis Buffer and Tris buffered saline-Tween were from SAINT-BIO (T10272, Shanghai, China). The anti-mouse Scavenger receptor-A (SR-A, #ab314227) antibody was from Abcam (Cambridge, USA), while the anti-SR-A human antibody (#WH0004481M1) was from Sigma-Aldrich (Saint Louis, USA). β-actin monoclonal antibody (#PMC201) and horseradish peroxidase (HRP) anti-rabbit immunoglobulin G (IgG) antibody (#PMS302) were purchased from Proteinbio Biotechnology (Nanjing, China). Capture anti-myeloperoxidase (MPO) (#AF3667, R&D Systems, Minneapolis, MN, USA), the secondary mouse HRP-conjugated anti-DNA antibody (#1154467501, Roche, Indianapolis, IN, USA) and the 3,3′,5,5’-Tetramethylbenzidine substrate (#34021, Thermo Scientific, Hudson, New Hampshire, USA) were purchased for MPO-DNA complex detection.
Mice
Four- to six-week-old BALB/c male nude mice (16–18 g) were obtained from Shanghai Bikai Keyi Biotechnology with animal license number SCXK (Shanghai) 2018-0006. Animals were subjected to standard pathogen-free conditions and provided with standard pellet feed and a free water supply. The mice underwent adaptive feeding for 3 days before the experiment. The treatment of the experimental mice meets the requirements of animal ethics and has been approved by Lianyungang Oriental Hospital affiliated to Xuzhou Medical University Institutional Animal Ethics Committee (no. 2023-028-01).
Tumor-bearing nude mice model construction and treatment
KYSE150 cells, which were in a good growth state and were in a vigorous growth period, were resuspended to form a cell suspension at a concentration of 1 × 107 cells/ml. Forty-four BALB/c nude mice were randomly selected. Under sterile conditions, the left abdominal cavity of nude mice was injected with 0.2 ml of KYSE150 cell suspension. Tumor formation was monitored by bioluminescence. When the tumor grew to around 150 mm3, 40 nude mice with similar tumor sizes were selected for further treatment. These mice were randomly divided into four groups: sham, radiation, ozone and radiation+ozone group (n = 10 per group).
The Sham group received no treatment. The radiation group received 8 grays (Gy) of radiation at a dose rate of 0.86 Gy/min using an RS 2000 PRO X-ray irradiator (Rad Source Technologies, USA). Only the tumor locations were exposed to radiation, while other parts of the mouse body were shielded with lead plates. The ozone treatment group received only intraperitoneal injections of fresh ozone (30 μg/ml) for treatment, with 0.5 ml per mouse for 13 consecutive days. The combined group (radiation+ozone) received 8 Gy of radiation after intraperitoneal injection of fresh ozone (30 μg/ml) for treatment. Each mouse received 0.5 ml for 13 consecutive days.
The tumor volume, as well as body weight, of each mouse were monitored every other day by caliper measurements. Half of the mice in each group were anesthetized (200 mg/kg ketamine, 10 mg/kg xylazine), blood was withdrawn by cardiac puncture 2 hours after 13 days of treatment and tumor tissues and blood (by either orbital eye bleed or cardiac puncture) were collected. Other mice were fed normally. Tumor suppression rates (TSR), absolute growth delay (AGD), normalized growth delay (NGD) and enhancement factor (EF) were calculated according to previously documented methods [20, 21]. The mice were subjected to euthanasia during the experiment if tumor volume/weight reached >10% of their body weight or when the experiments were completed.
Peripheral cell-free DNA (cf-DNA) detection
Cf-DNA detection was introduced according to the Quant-iT™ PicoGreen® dsDNA Assay Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Carlsbad, CA, USA) instructions. First, Quant-iT™ PicoGreen® reagent was diluted with 1 × Tris-ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid buffer 200 times to prepare a working solution. One milliliter of peripheral blood was collected from mice and centrifuged at 1400 g (4°C, 15 minutes) in order to collect serum. Each well of the enzyme-linked plate was filled with 50 μl of serum and 50 μl of working solution. The mixture on the plate was carefully shaken and mixed well before a 5-minute reaction in the dark. The fluorescence intensity was detected using a MD/SpectraMax M2e plate reader (Molecular Devices, Sunnyvale, CA, USA) at 480/520 nm, which is proportional to the cf-DNA content.
Serum cytokine analysis
According to the respective manufacturer’s instructions, measurement of cytokine levels, including interleukin-6 (IL-6), interferon-γ (IFN-γ), tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF-α) and matrix metalloproteinase-9 (MMP-9), was completed using commercial ELISA kits. MPO-DNA complexes were detected in the mouse serum using MPO (1:200), the secondary mouse anti-DNA-POD (1:500) and TMB substrate as previously described [22].
Immunohistochemistry
Mouse tumor tissue was collected, fixed and then embedded in paraffin. The paraffined tumor was subjected to cutting into 5-μm-thick sections (HistoCore multicut, Leica Biosystems, Wetzlar, Germany). After conventional dewaxing, the slices were subjected to antigen extraction in 10 mM citrate buffer (pH 6.0, 90°C). At 4°C, the slices were diluted with anti-P-AMPK or anti-SR-A polyclonal antibodies at 1:100 and incubated for 1 hour with HRP anti-rabbit IgG antibodies (room temperature). Then, the slides were washed, followed by two-step staining with diaminobenzidine and hematoxylin. The test was under a microscope (Olympus BX-41; Olympus, Tokyo, Japan).
Western blotting
Peripheral serum (50 μl) was diluted with 50 μl of radioimmunoprecipitation assay buffer and placed on ice to stand for 15 minutes. Then, the mixture was mixed evenly and centrifuged at 3000 rpm for 15 minutes. The obtained supernatant was transferred to another clean Eppendorf tube. Five microliter supernatant solution was used for protein quantification using the BCA method. The remaining protein solutions were added to the loading buffer and boiled in water for 15 minutes. The samples (20 μl) were added to each lane for electrophoresis. The obtained protein was then transferred to the polyvinylidene fluoride membrane, sealed with blocking solution for 1 hour and washed three times with Tris-buffered saline-Tween buffer (10–15 minutes each time). Subsequently, an overnight incubation was conducted for the PVDF membrane, along with primary antibodies (p-AMPK antibody and SR-A antibody, both 1:1000) at 4°C. Then, a 3-hour incubation with HRP anti-rabbit IgG antibiotics (1:2000) was conducted for the PVDF (room temperature). Finally, PVDF membrane was stained and placed in the iBright CL750 Imaging System (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA) to detect the indicated proteins.
Statistical analysis
We used Graphpad Prim9 statistical software for data analysis and graphic creation. The comparisons used a t-test, or one-way or two-way analysis of variance (Tukey’s multiple comparisons test). P < 0.05 was defined as statistical significance.
RESULTS
Ozone enhanced sensitivity of the KYSE150-transplanted nude mouse model for esophageal cancer to radiotherapy
The radiation group and radiation+ozone group showed inhibitory effects on mouse