Your Privacy
We use cookies to make sure that our website works properly, as well as some 'optional' cookies to personalise content and advertising, provide social media features and analyse how people use our site. By accepting some or all optional cookies you give consent to the processing of your personal data, including transfer to third parties, some in countries outside of the European Economic Area that do not offer the same data protection standards as the country where you live. You can decide which optional cookies to accept by clicking on 'Manage preferences', where you can also find more information about how your personal data is processed. Further information can be found in our privacy policy.
Accept all cookies
Manage preferences
Browse
Tools & Services
About
Sign In
Submit a Preprint
Research Article
Spatial Distribution of Energy Stations and Monitoring of Air Quality in Port Harcourt, Rivers State, Nigeria.
Barinedum Valentine Kponi, Chike Enyinda, MeeluBari Barinua Kpang
This is a preprint; it has not been peer reviewed by a journal.
https://doi.org/10.21203/rs.3.rs-4541872/v1
This work is licensed under a CC BY 4.0 License
Abstract
This study examines the geospatial locations of energy stations within Port-Harcourt Aba expressway to ascertain their locations if it conforms to standard practice. It also took into cognizance the in-situ monitoring of the various air pollutants within the vicinity of the energy stations. The study location is in Obio/Akpor and Port Harcourt city Local Government Area, Rivers State. The result of the proximity analysis reveals that the energy stations do not fall within the standard of 15metres specified by DPR (Department of Petroleum Resources). The various pollutants examined are PM 10, PM 2.5, carbon monoxide (Co), Nitrogen Dioxide (No2), ground level ozone (O3), and sulphur dioxide (S02). The result reveals that their concentrations values fall within the permissible limit as specified by NESREA except (C02) which is the primary pollutant was extremely highly than the permissible limit of 400 (ppm). This can be attributed to the influx of vehicles that buys fuel from the energy stations. The concentration of (C02) poses a serious health effect on the pump attendants due to their constant inhaling of the pollutants. The study concludes that energy stations should be cited at the approved DPR standard of (15metres) and actionable measures should be put in place to aid in the reduction of CO2 within the energy stations. Finally, the study recommends that there should be strict compliance to DPR standard in the siting of energy stations.
Geospatial Analysis
Energy station locations
Ambient Air Quality
Figures
Introduction
Materials and Methods
Findings
Conclusion
Declarations
References
Plate
Additional Declarations
Supplementary Files
Cite
Share
PDF
Status:
Under Review
Version 1
posted 02 Jul, 2024
Editor assigned by journal
15 Jun, 2024
Submission checks completed at journal
15 Jun, 2024
First submitted to journal
06 Jun, 2024
You are reading this latest preprint version
Citations
See more
Engagement
11 views
Comments
0
Research Square lets you share your work early, gain feedback from the community, and start making changes to your manuscript prior to peer review in a journal.
As a division of Research Square Company, we’re committed to making research communication faster, fairer, and more useful. We do this by developing innovative software and high quality services for the global research community. Our growing team is made up of researchers and industry professionals working together to solve the most critical problems facing scientific publishing.
Also discoverable on
PLATFORM
About
Our Team
In Review
Editorial Policies
Advisory Board
Contact Us
Help Center
RESOURCES
Author Services
Research Quality Evaluation
Blog
Accessibility
API Access
RSS feed
Cookies Settings
COMPANY
About Us
Careers
Partner With Us
Responsibility
Press
© Research Square 2024 | ISSN 2693-5015 (online)
Privacy Policy
Terms of Service
Do Not Sell My Personal Information
By clicking “Accept All Cookies”, you agree to the storing of cookies on your device to enhance site navigation, analyze site usage, and assist in our marketing efforts. Privacy Policy
Cookies Settings Accept All Cookies