CURRENT ARCHIVES ABOUT
Search
Register Login
Home / Archives / Vol. 4 No. 2 (2024) / Articles
AN EVALUATION OF GLOBAL WARMING AND ENVIRONMENTAL ETHICS
Victor Ogheneochuko Jeko., Ph.D
Odigie Ndidi Joseph
Keywords: Ecologism, Ecosystem, Environmentalism, Ethics, Global Warming
Abstract
The phenomenon of global warming has become a concern about the safety of the environment. Global warming has resulted in the destruction of the ozone layer and this is actually caused by environmental degradation. The fundamental problems of environmental degradation have resulted in the prevalence of over flooding and extinction of some plants and animal species. Some of the causes of global warming include industrial pollution, deforestation, overpopulation, industrialization, urbanization, bureaucratization; the use of combustible engines, automobile vehicles and fossil fuels. The solution to the problems of global warming is actually international cooperation by all countries of the world to reduce the usage of gas emission. The objective of this paper is to unveil the potential dangers of environmental degradation to the world's ecosystems and its catastrophic consequences on humanity. Global warming reveals that its impact reflects on a kind of catastrophe. This paper adopts the analytical framework in discussing the ethical implications of global warming and environmental nonsustainability on human existence. Human existence has been bedevilled by certain existential burden due to human deliberate choices and actions. The findings of this paper are that international cooperation is fundamental in mitigating the challenges of global warming; nature is an integral part of human beings and sentient beings. This paper concludes that humanity will be doomed if necessary steps are not taken by countries all over the world in mitigating the menace of global warming. Global warming has resulted in lethal solar radiation.
PDF
Published
2024-06-29
Issue
Vol. 4 No. 2 (2024)
Language
English
Deutsch
Français (France)
Information
For Readers
For Authors
For Librarians