Access content directly
Documentation
EN
Sign in
HAL Portal insu
Search
Upload
Home
Browse
User's guide
Conference Papers Year : 2024
Ozone trends and exceptional events as seen by the IASI remote sensors
Cathy Clerbaux (1, 2) , Sarah Safieddine (1) , Juliette Hadji-Lazaro (1) , Anne Boynard (1, 3) , Marie Bouillon (1, 3) , Catherine Wespes (2) , Daniel Hurtmans (2) , Pierre-François Coheur (2) , Jaap Onderwaater (4) , Marie Doutriaux-Boucher (4)
Show details
1 TROPO - LATMOS
2 SQUARES - Spectroscopy, Quantum Chemistry and Atmospheric Remote Sensing
3 Sté SPASCIA
4 EUMETSAT - European Organisation for the Exploitation of Meteorological Satellites
Abstract
en
The French IASI satellite mission has amassed a remarkable 17-year radiance dataset, from which temperature, ozone and nitric acid profiles are retrieved both day and night, from pole to pole. Near real time measurements are routinely distributed by Eumetsat, allowing the monitoring of the ozone hole, the analysis of exceptional events such as stratospheric intrusions and sudden stratospheric warmings, as well as the observation of tropospheric increases of ozone associated with fires or local pollution events. Recently, the entire IASI ozone dataset underwent reprocessing with the aim of creating a thoroughly homogeneous observational record suitable for climate trend analysis. This involved implementing radiance corrections to the raw recorded spectra and ensuring the use of consistent cloud, water vapour and temperature products, which are the main auxiliary data used for the ozone retrievals. In this presentation, we will illustrate the evolution of global distributions over time, providing an analysis of observed changes since 2007. Additionally, we will show the impact of sudden stratospheric warming events in both the Southern and Northern Hemispheres on total ozone distributions. Finally, we will demonstrate the influence of the January 2022 Hunga Tonga volcano eruption on the ozone vertical distribution in the Southern Hemisphere.
Domains
Ocean, Atmosphere
Complete list of metadata
Catherine Cardon  : Connect in order to contact the contributor
https://insu.hal.science/insu-04637301
Submitted on : Friday, July 5, 2024-8:55:52 PM
Last modification on : Sunday, July 7, 2024-3:07:24 AM
No file
Dates and versions
insu-04637301 , version 1 (05-07-2024)
Identifiers
HAL Id : insu-04637301 , version 1
Cite
Cathy Clerbaux, Sarah Safieddine, Juliette Hadji-Lazaro, Anne Boynard, Marie Bouillon, et al.. Ozone trends and exceptional events as seen by the IASI remote sensors. The 36th Quadrennial Ozone Symposium 2024, Jul 2024, Boulder, United States. ⟨insu-04637301⟩
Export
BibTeX XML-TEI Dublin Core DC Terms EndNote DataCite
Collections
INSU CNRS LATMOS UVSQ UNIV-PARIS-SACLAY SORBONNE-UNIVERSITE SU-SCIENCES GS-GEOSCIENCES GS-PHYSIQUE INSTITUT-SCIENCES-LUMIERE
0
View
0
Download
Share
Gmail
Gmail
Mastodon
Mastodon
Facebook
Facebook
X
X
LinkedIn
LinkedIn
Share
More
Contact
Support
Resources
Documentation
FAQ
API
OAI-PMH
AuréHAL
Informations
About
Privacy and personal data
Legal terms
Accessibility
Declaration of compliance
Legal issues
I publish, what are my rights?
The Digital Republic bill
Non-assignment strategy of rights
SHERPA/RoMEO
Portals
Institutional portals
HAL
HAL SHS
HAL Thèses
MédiHAL
CCSD
CCSD
Episciences
Sciencesconf