Product & Services
Subscribe
Submit a paper
Browse
Rankings
Blog↗
Contact
Create account
Sign in
  This is a preprint article, it offers immediate access but has not been peer reviewed.
Download This Paper
Open PDF in Browser
Add Paper to My Library
Share:
Fluorescence Spectrometric Analysis for Diagnosing Compositional Variations in Effluent Organic Matter by Chlorination and Ozonation
41 Pages Posted: 15 Jul 2024
Hoang Dung Nguyen
Kyungpook National University
Sangsik Kim
Kyungpook National University
Sungyun Lee
Kyungpook National University
Abstract
Analyzing the reactivity of organic matter to oxidants such as chlorination and ozonation, is crucial for evaluating the effectiveness of water treatment systems and their potential impacts on environmental safety and human health. This study explored the changes in organic substances, specifically bovine serum albumin (BSA), humic acid sodium salt (HA), and effluent organic matter (EfOM) from a wastewater treatment facility during chlorination and ozonation. Four spectrometric techniques were employed: ultraviolet absorbance at 254 nm (UVA254), fluorescent excitation-emission matrix (EEM), synchronous fluorescence two-dimensional correlation spectroscopy (SF-2DCOS), and EEM-parallel factor integrated 2DCOS (EEM-PARAFAC-2DCOS). The findings revealed that ozone possesses superior oxidizing properties compared to chlorine, as evidenced by UVA254 and EEM analyses, resulting in more diverse structural modifications in EfOM. SF-2DCOS and EEM-PARAFAC-2DCOS provided comprehensive details on the direction and sequence of these changes, with EEM-PARAFAC-2DCOS delivering clear and intuitive insights. Protein-like substances were the most susceptible to chlorination and ozonation, exhibiting different reaction sequences with each oxidant. Furthermore, variations in protein-like and humic-like components in actual EfOM samples may not align precisely with those in model substances, emphasizing the importance of considering specific organic matter variations in real EfOM samples compared to model substances. This research offered a deeper understanding of the reactivity and transformation of organic matter in wastewater treatment processes through simple and rapid spectroscopic methods, potentially improving the management and mitigation of undesired byproducts.
Keywords: Effluent organic matter (EfOM), ozonation, chlorination, Two-dimensional correlation spectroscopy (2DCOS), EEM-PARAFAC-2DCOS analysis
Suggested Citation:
Nguyen, Hoang Dung and Kim, Sangsik and Lee, Sungyun, Fluorescence Spectrometric Analysis for Diagnosing Compositional Variations in Effluent Organic Matter by Chlorination and Ozonation. Available at SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4895089 or http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.4895089



Download This Paper
Open PDF in Browser
86 References
Sanchez
Posted: 2013
Bsa B-C ; Chlorinated , Xu
360/440 Humic-like substances Humic-like substances Posted: 2013
H-C
, volume 314 Posted: 1260
Humic-Like ; Sanchez
Posted: 2013
Load more
0 Citations
Do you have a job opening that you would like to promote on SSRN?
Place Job Opening
Paper statistics
DOWNLOADS
2
ABSTRACT VIEWS
9
86 References
PlumX Metrics
Related eJournals
Environmental Engineering & Technology eJournal
Follow
Feedback
Submit a Paper
Section 508 Text Only Pages
SSRN Quick Links
SSRN Solutions
Research Paper Series
Conference Papers
Partners in Publishing
Jobs & Announcements
Special Topic Hubs
SSRN Rankings
Top Papers
Top Authors
Top Organizations
About SSRN
Network Directors
Announcements
Contact us
FAQs
Copyright Terms and Conditions Privacy Policy
All content on this site: Copyright © 2023 Elsevier Inc., its licensors, and contributors. All rights are reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. For all open access content, the Creative Commons licensing terms apply.
We use cookies to help provide and enhance our service and tailor content.
To learn more, visit Cookie Settings.
We use cookies that are necessary to make our site work. We may also use additional cookies to analyze, improve, and personalize our content and your digital experience. For more information, see ourCookie Policy
Cookie Settings
Accept all cookies