Skip to main content
Now on article abstract page
ads
Feedback
ORCID
About
Sign Up
Log In
Search Bar to Enter New Query
quick field: Author First Author Abstract Year Fulltext
Select a field or operator
abstract
abstract only
acknowledgements
affiliation
arXiv category
author count
author
bibcode
bibliographic group
bib abbrev, e.g. ApJ
body of article
data archive
collection
citation count
doctype
doi
entdate
first author
fulltext
identifier
inst
keyword
object
orcid
page
property
publication full name
date published
title
volume
year
citations()
pos()
references()
reviews()
similar()
topn()
trending()
useful()
single wildcard: ?
wildcard: *
exact match: =
All Search Terms
view
Abstract
Citations
References
Co-Reads
Similar Papers
Volume Content
Graphics
Metrics
Export Citation
feedback
Solar Irradiance: Earth's Energy Source
Show affiliations
Lean, Judith
Abstract
Earth's energy emanates from the Sun, a variable star. Solar irradiance heats Earth's surface and atmosphere, initiating myriad chemical, radiative and dynamical processes that establish Earth's surface climate, stratospheric ozone layer, upper atmosphere thermosphere and its embedded ionosphere. Changes in solar irradiance over the past century have been suggested to cause climate change that is a significant fraction of industrial-era warming… or so small as to be undetectable.
Now, with more than forty years of space-based observations of solar irradiance and multiple geophysical quantities, and extensive advances in modeling solar irradiance and terrestrial variability, we can clarify with greater certainty the extent to which changes in solar irradiance alter Earth's environment, from surface to space, in the present space era and the pre-industrial past. Projecting this understanding to upcoming decades permits speculation of C21st global climate change, recovery of the ozone layer and future space environment impacts on earth orbiting spacecraft. This talk summarizes current observational evidence for solar irradiance variability and relates this variability to the Sun's magnetic activity cycles that produce bright faculae and dark sunspots. Models of solar irradiance variability constructed from current observations are extended into the past and future, and used to quantify the Sun's role in global climate change, ozone-depletion and recovery, and space environment climatology.

Publication:
244th Meeting of the American Astronomical Society, id. 126.01. Bulletin of the American Astronomical Society, Vol. 56, No. 7 e-id 2024n7i126p01
Pub Date: June 2024 Bibcode: 2024AAS...24412601L

Feedback/Corrections?
FULL TEXT SOURCES
Publisher
Electronic on-line publisher article (HTML)
© The SAO Astrophysics Data System
adshelp[at]cfa.harvard.edu
The ADS is operated by the Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory under NASA Cooperative Agreement 80NSSC21M0056
*The material contained in this document is based upon work supported by a National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) grant or cooperative agreement. Any opinions, findings, conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of NASA.
Resources
About ADS
ADS Help
What's New
Careers@ADS
Accessibility
Social
@adsabs
ADS Blog
Project
Switch to basic HTML
Privacy Policy
Terms of Use
Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory
Smithsonian Institution
NASA
🌓