Product & Services
Subscribe
Submit a paper
Browse
Rankings
Blog↗
Contact
Create account
Sign in
  This is a preprint article, it offers immediate access but has not been peer reviewed.
Download This Paper
Open PDF in Browser
Add Paper to My Library
Share:
Spatial and Temporal Prediction of Ozone Concentration in the Pearl River Delta Region Based on a Dynamic Graph Convolutional Network
20 Pages Posted: 2 Jul 2024
Tongshu Yang
Guangdong Ocean University
Sheng Li
Guangdong Ocean University
Baoqin Chen
Guangdong Ocean University
Abstract
The variation of ozone (O3) concentration is closely related to other meteorological factors such as temperature and wind speed, and there is significant dynamic uncertainty, making related research very complex and difficult. This paper will establish a time-space ozone prediction model based on dynamic graph convolution network to study the O3 pollution in the Pearl River Delta (PRD) region of China. Firstly, use an isolated forest (iForest) for anomaly detection in data preprocessing. Secondly, based on data such as wind direction, wind speed, and station geographic location, establish the diffusion distance of the wind field and construct a dynamic graph sequence accordingly. Finally, a spatio-temporal dynamic graph convolutional network (STD-GCN) based on dynamic graph sequences was established for predicting O3 concentration. The experimental results showed that STD-GCN outperformed long short-term memory (LSTM) and graph convolutional embedded LSTM (GC-LSTM). Specifically, by integrating wind field factors, STD-GCN exhibits better spatial interpretability.
Keywords: Ozone concentration predictions, Spatio-Temporal Graph Convolutional Network, Dynamic wind-field, Monitoring of isolated forest outliers
Suggested Citation:
Yang, Tongshu and Li, Sheng and Chen, Baoqin, Spatial and Temporal Prediction of Ozone Concentration in the Pearl River Delta Region Based on a Dynamic Graph Convolutional Network. Available at SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4882468 or http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.4882468



Download This Paper
Open PDF in Browser
32 References
S Agarwal , S Sharma , R Suresh , M H Rahman , S Vranckx , B Maiheu , L Blyth , S Ja Nssen , P Gargava , V K Shukla , S Batra
Air quality forecasting using arti ficial neural networks with real time dynamic error correction in highly polluted regio ns
Science of The Total Environment , volume 735 Posted: 2020
Y Chabchoub , M U Togbe , A Boly , R Chiky
An In-Depth Study and Improve ment of Isolation Forest
IEEE Access , volume 10 , p. 10219 - 10237 Posted: 2022
G Chattopadhyay , S K Midya , S Chattopadhyay
MLP based predictive model for surface ozone concentration over an urban area in the Gangetic West Bengal during p re-monsoon season
Journal of Atmospheric and Solar-Terrestrial Physics , volume 184 , p. 57 - 62 Posted: 2019
J X Chen , J L Zhang , R X Qian , J F Yuan , Y J Ren
An Anomaly Detection Met hod for Wireless Sensor Networks Based on the Improved Isolation Forest
Applied S ciences , volume 13 , issue 2 Posted: 2023
Load more
0 Citations
Do you have a job opening that you would like to promote on SSRN?
Place Job Opening
Paper statistics
DOWNLOADS
1
ABSTRACT VIEWS
14
32 References
PlumX Metrics
Related eJournals
Atmospheric Sciences eJournal
Follow
Feedback
Submit a Paper
Section 508 Text Only Pages
SSRN Quick Links
SSRN Solutions
Research Paper Series
Conference Papers
Partners in Publishing
Jobs & Announcements
Special Topic Hubs
SSRN Rankings
Top Papers
Top Authors
Top Organizations
About SSRN
Network Directors
Announcements
Contact us
FAQs
Copyright Terms and Conditions Privacy Policy
All content on this site: Copyright © 2023 Elsevier Inc., its licensors, and contributors. All rights are reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. For all open access content, the Creative Commons licensing terms apply.
We use cookies to help provide and enhance our service and tailor content.
To learn more, visit Cookie Settings.
We use cookies that are necessary to make our site work. We may also use additional cookies to analyze, improve, and personalize our content and your digital experience. For more information, see ourCookie Policy
Cookie Settings
Accept all cookies