Skip to main content
HOMESUBMITFAQBLOGALERTS / RSSRESOURCESABOUTCHANNELS
Search for this keyword
Advanced Search
New Results
Follow this preprint
Resolving multi-image spatial lipidomic responses to inhaled toxicants by machine learning
View ORCID Profile
Nathanial C. Stevens, Tong Shen, Joshua Martinez, Veneese J. B. Evans, Morgan C. Domanico,
View ORCID Profile
Elizabeth K. Neumann,
View ORCID Profile
Laura S. Van Winkle,
View ORCID Profile
Oliver Fiehn
doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.07.05.602264
This article is a preprint and has not been certified by peer review [what does this mean?].
0001002
AbstractFull TextInfo/HistoryMetrics
Preview PDF
Abstract
Regional responses to inhaled toxicants are essential to understand the pathogenesis of lung disease under exposure to air pollution. We evaluated the effect of combined allergen sensitization and ozone exposure on eliciting spatial differences in lipid distribution in the mouse lung that may contribute to ozone-induced exacerbations in asthma. Lung lobes from male and female BALB/c mice were cryosectioned and acquired by high resolution mass spectrometry imaging (MSI). Processed MSI peak annotations were validated by LC-MS/MS data from scraped tissue slides and microdissected lung tissue. Images were normalized and segmented into clusters. Interestingly, segmented clusters overlapped with stained serial tissue sections, enabling statistical analysis across biological replicates for morphologically relevant lung regions. Spatially distinct lipids had higher overall degree of unsaturated fatty acids in distal lung regions compared to proximal regions. Furthermore, the airway and alveolar epithelium exhibited significantly decreased sphingolipid and glycerophospholipid abundance in females, but not in males. We demonstrate the potential role of lipid saturation in healthy lung function and highlight sex differences in regional lung lipid distribution following ozone exposure. Our study provides a framework for future MSI experiments capable of relative quantification across biological replicates and expansion to multiple sample types, including human tissue.
Competing Interest Statement
The authors have declared no competing interest.
Copyright 
The copyright holder for this preprint is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
Back to top
Previous
Next
Posted July 10, 2024.
Download PDF
Print/Save Options
Supplementary Material
Data/Code
Email
Share
Citation Tools
Get QR code
COVID-19 SARS-CoV-2 preprints from medRxiv and bioRxiv
Subject Area
Pharmacology and Toxicology
Subject Areas
All Articles
Animal Behavior and Cognition
Biochemistry
Bioengineering
Bioinformatics
Biophysics
Cancer Biology
Cell Biology
Clinical Trials*
Developmental Biology
Ecology
Epidemiology*
Evolutionary Biology
Genetics
Genomics
Immunology
Microbiology
Molecular Biology
Neuroscience
Paleontology
Pathology
Pharmacology and Toxicology
Physiology
Plant Biology
Scientific Communication and Education
Synthetic Biology
Systems Biology
Zoology
* The Clinical Trials and Epidemiology subject categories are now closed to new submissions following the completion of bioRxiv's clinical research pilot project and launch of the dedicated health sciences server medRxiv (submit.medrxiv.org). New papers that report results of Clinical Trials must now be submitted to medRxiv. Most new Epidemiology papers also should be submitted to medRxiv, but if a paper contains no health-related information, authors may choose to submit it to another bioRxiv subject category (e.g., Genetics or Microbiology).



We use cookies on this site to enhance your user experience. By clicking any link on this page you are giving your consent for us to set cookies.
Continue Find out more