Login
  Home UA Graduate and Undergraduate Research UA Theses and Dissertations Master's Theses View Item
Browse
All of UA Campus Repository
Communities
Title
Authors
Issue Date
Submit Date
Subjects
Publisher
Journal
This Collection
Title
Authors
Issue Date
Submit Date
Subjects
Publisher
Journal
My Account
Login
Register
About
About
UA Faculty Publications
UA Dissertations
UA Master's Theses
UA Honors Theses
UA Press
UA Yearbooks
UA Catalogs
UA Libraries
Statistics
Most Popular Items
Statistics by Country
Most Popular Authors
On Ozone’s Weekly Cycle in a Monsoon-Impacted Arid Region: A Close Look at Seasonal Influence in Arizona
Export
Name:
azu_etd_21186_sip1_m.pdf
Size:
3.752Mb
Format:
PDF
Download
Author
Greenslade, Meghan
Issue Date
2024
Keywords
Air Quality
Arizona
Maricopa County
NOx
Ozone
Weekend Effect
Advisor
Sorooshian, Armin
Metadata
Show full item record
Publisher
The University of Arizona.
Rights
Copyright © is held by the author. Digital access to this material is made possible by the University Libraries, University of Arizona. Further transmission, reproduction, presentation (such as public display or performance) of protected items is prohibited except with permission of the author.
Abstract
This study advances insights on ozone (O3) concentration temporal cycles in Arizona, exploring differences between weekdays and weekends to understand the impact of human activities on O3 fluctuations. By examining data from six sites across Arizona, this study compares O3 and NO2 levels based on day of the week and time of day as well as during five distinct seasons: fall (Sep-Nov), winter (Dec-Feb), spring (Mar-May), dry summer (June), and monsoon summer (Jul-Aug). Results highlight the correlation of O3 formation on O3 precursor levels, particularly nitrogen oxides (NOx) and volatile organic compounds (VOCs). It was found that O3 levels are contingent on diurnal, day-of-week, and seasonally-dependent factors. This dependence influences the phenomena called the "weekend effect", wherein O3 concentrations exhibit higher levels during weekends compared to weekdays, which contrasts with the more intuitive weekly cycle of particulate matter. This study reveals opposing features during Arizona’s two summer seasons in which O3 regimes reverse from VOC-sensitive (in dry summer) to NOx-sensitive (in monsoon summer) emphasizing the importance of dividing the Arizona summer season in future studies. A specific case study for Phoenix during the first COVID-19 lockdown from 15 March to 31 August (2020) shows that the area does not mimic an extended weekend scenario, where the O3 response to reduced NOx due to lockdown is similar to typical weekend trends seen in VOC-limited regimes at urban sites. Instead, we see a decrease in O3 levels in Phoenix typical of NOx-limited regime in rural sites. We attribute this decrease to the regional O3 response as most areas surrounding western United States are typically either transitioning to, or already under, a NOx-limited regime. These findings provide essential insights into understanding the intricate relationship among human activities, seasonal fluctuations, and pollutant emissions and transport that influence O3 levels across Arizona, potentially informing effective control strategies aimed at reducing O3 exceedances in the region.
Type
Electronic Thesis
text
Degree Name
M.S.
Degree Level
masters
Degree Program
Graduate College
Environmental Engineering
Degree Grantor
University of Arizona
Collections
Master's Theses
  Show Statistical Information
The University of Arizona Libraries | 1510 E. University Blvd. | Tucson, AZ 85721-0055
Tel 520-621-6442 | repository@u.library.arizona.edu
DSpace software copyright © 2002-2017  DuraSpace
Quick Guide | Contact Us | Send Feedback
Open Repository is a service operated by 