Your Privacy
We use cookies to make sure that our website works properly, as well as some 'optional' cookies to personalise content and advertising, provide social media features and analyse how people use our site. By accepting some or all optional cookies you give consent to the processing of your personal data, including transfer to third parties, some in countries outside of the European Economic Area that do not offer the same data protection standards as the country where you live. You can decide which optional cookies to accept by clicking on 'Manage preferences', where you can also find more information about how your personal data is processed. Further information can be found in our privacy policy.
Accept all cookies
Manage preferences
Browse
Tools & Services
About
Sign In
Submit a Preprint
Article
Reversal in China’s Air Quality Gains
Ben Silver, Carly Reddington, Yue Chen, Stephen Arnold
This is a preprint; it has not been peer reviewed by a journal.
https://doi.org/10.21203/rs.3.rs-4432141/v1
This work is licensed under a CC BY 4.0 License
Abstract
China’s air quality has improved rapidly since the early 2010s, when the government launched an action plan focussed on reducing fine particulate matter (PM2.5) pollution, the pollutant species associated with the largest negative health impact. Measurements from China’s monitoring network, now consisting of >2000 surface stations, have shown a rapid fall in PM2.5 concentrations consistently over the period 2014–2019, while sulphur dioxide (SO2), carbon monoxide (CO) and nitrogen dioxide (NO2) concentrations have also significantly decreased. Concurrently there has been a rapid increase in ozone concentrations, which has been partly attributed to falling particulate matter concentrations. However, air quality data from China remains difficult to access, and recent changes in China’s economic outlook mean that the future trajectory of China’s air quality continues to be highly uncertain. Here we analyse 10 years of air quality monitoring data from May 2014 to April 2024 to assess whether China’s air quality has continued to improve in recent years, in the wake of the COVID-19 lockdowns and other economic challenges. After using an improved data cleaning algorithm to remove outliers from the dataset, we use a non-linear trend fitting technique to extract underlying trends and their uncertainties. We find that the steep negative trend in PM2.5 that was observed during 2014–2019 has now reversed, and since June 2022 there has been a significant (>95% confident) positive trend at over half of China’s air quality monitoring stations. This is mirrored by the average trend of ozone, which was positive during 2014–2019, but since December 2022 there has been a significant negative trend at almost half of monitoring stations. The increase in PM2.5 exposure has the potential to worsen air quality health impacts in China, particularly given its ageing population.
Earth and environmental sciences/Environmental sciences/Environmental chemistry/Atmospheric chemistry
Earth and environmental sciences/Environmental sciences/Environmental impact
Earth and environmental sciences/Environmental sciences/Environmental chemistry/Environmental monitoring
Earth and environmental sciences/Environmental sciences/Environmental chemistry/Pollution remediation
Health sciences/Risk factors
Full Text
Additional Declarations
Supplementary Files
Cite
Share
PDF
Status:
Posted
Version 1
posted 30 May, 2024
You are reading this latest preprint version
Citations
See more
Engagement
254 views
Comments
0
Related Preprints
4
Research Square lets you share your work early, gain feedback from the community, and start making changes to your manuscript prior to peer review in a journal.
As a division of Research Square Company, we’re committed to making research communication faster, fairer, and more useful. We do this by developing innovative software and high quality services for the global research community. Our growing team is made up of researchers and industry professionals working together to solve the most critical problems facing scientific publishing.
Also discoverable on
PLATFORM
About
Our Team
In Review
Editorial Policies
Advisory Board
Contact Us
Help Center
RESOURCES
Author Services
Research Quality Evaluation
Blog
Accessibility
API Access
RSS feed
Cookies Settings
COMPANY
About Us
Careers
Partner With Us
Responsibility
Press
© Research Square 2024 | ISSN 2693-5015 (online)
Privacy Policy
Terms of Service
Do Not Sell My Personal Information
By clicking “Accept All Cookies”, you agree to the storing of cookies on your device to enhance site navigation, analyze site usage, and assist in our marketing efforts. Privacy Policy
Cookies Settings Accept All Cookies