Jump to Content
This site uses cookies, tags, and tracking settings to store information that help give you the very best browsing experience.
Dismiss this warning
JOURNALS
BROWSE
PUBLISH
SUBSCRIBE
ABOUT
Sign in
Sign up
Search
  Journal of the Atmospheric Sciences
Volume 81: Issue 6
Sections
References
Metrics
Related Content
Previous Article
Next Article
Editorial Type: Article
Article Type: Research Article
Variations of Kelvin Waves around the Tropical Tropopause Inversion Layer from GNSS RO Measurements
Jiahua Li





, Xiaohua Xu






, and Jia Luo






Online Publication: 31 May 2024
Print Publication: 01 Jun 2024
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1175/JAS-D-23-0114.1
Page(s): 945–958
Article History
Purchase article
© Get Permissions
Rent on DeepDyve
Restricted access
Abstract/Excerpt
Full Text
Abstract
In the present study, the tropical tropopause inversion layer (TIL) Kelvin waves are extracted from the Global Navigation Satellite System (GNSS) radio occultation (RO) temperature data of multiple missions from January 2007 to December 2020. We focus on the variations of TIL Kelvin waves in two longitude regions, the Maritime Continent (MC; 90°–150°E) and the Pacific Ocean (PO; 170°–230°E). The results show that over both regions, ENSO leads to the opposite variations of TIL Kelvin wave temperature amplitude during different ENSO phases. Specifically, during La Niña, the strong (weak) deep convection over MC (PO) leads to strengthened (weakened) static stability. With enhanced easterly (westerly) winds and strengthened (weakened) static stability, the TIL Kelvin wave temperature amplitudes are stronger (weaker) over MC (PO). The opposite phenomenon occurs during El Niño. The zonal-mean zonal winds affect TIL Kelvin wave temperature amplitudes by two mechanisms. First, the prevalence of easterlies (westerlies) in the upper troposphere affects the upward propagation of Kelvin waves, resulting in stronger (weaker) TIL Kelvin wave temperature amplitudes over MC (PO). Second, the TIL Kelvin wave temperature amplitude peaks about 2 months before the zero-wind line of the descending westerly QBO phase occurs, due to dissipation on the critical line. Additionally, the rapid increase of zonal-mean static stability significantly affects the annual variation of TIL Kelvin wave temperature amplitudes. They both reach maxima during DJF and minima during JJA, which should be related to the annual cycles of temperature and ozone mixing ratio in the TIL.
Significance Statement
Recent studies indicate that the Kelvin wave temperature amplitudes in the tropical tropopause inversion layer (TIL) exhibit distinct characteristics compared with those in other height levels, while the modulation mechanisms of the TIL Kelvin waves need further investigation. The present study aims to study the differences in the variabilities and the modulation factors of TIL Kelvin waves over two longitude regions. Our findings suggest that the different responses of background conditions during ENSO phases influence the spatiotemporal distribution of the TIL Kelvin waves. Besides, the zonal winds and the static stability significantly affect the temporal variations of TIL Kelvin waves. Our work fills the research gap of TIL Kelvin waves and contributes to understanding the dynamics of tropical tropopause variations.
Xiaohua Xu’s current affiliation: School of Geodesy and Geomatics, Wuhan University, Wuhan, China.
© 2024 American Meteorological Society. This published article is licensed under the terms of the default AMS reuse license. For information regarding reuse of this content and general copyright information, consult the AMS Copyright Policy (www.ametsoc.org/PUBSReuseLicenses).
Corresponding author: Xiaohua Xu, xhxu@sgg.whu.edu.cn
Save
Email this content
AMS Publications
Journals
BAMS
Monographs
AMS Books
Glossary of Meteorology
State of the Climate
Explaining Extreme Events
Get Involved with AMS
AMS Online Profile
Publish
Benefits of Publishing with AMS
Author Information
Submit Manuscript
Subscribe
Member Subscription
Non-Member Subscriptions
Institutional Subscriptions
Affiliate Sites
AMS Home
Front Page Blog
Living on the Real World Blog
AMS Weather Band
Follow Us
Contact Us
CONTACT PUBLISHING STAFF
EMAIL & PHONE CONTACTS
Email: amsjol@ametsoc.org
Phone: 617-227-2425
Fax: 617-742-8718
Headquarters:
45 Beacon Street
Boston, MA 02108-3693
DC Office:
1200 New York Ave NW
Suite 500
Washington, DC 200005-3928
Privacy Policy & Disclaimer Get Adobe Acrobat Reader
© 2024 American Meteorological Society
Powered by PubFactory