Product & Services
Subscribe
Submit a paper
Browse
Rankings
Blog↗
Contact
Create account
Sign in
Download This Paper
Open PDF in Browser
Add Paper to My Library
Share:
Development of an Innovative Technology for Accelerated Cooking of No Yeast Bread Using Ion-Ozonized Water
Eastern-European Journal of Enterprise Technologies, 5(11 (113), 85–96. doi:10.15587/1729-4061.2021.242838, 2021
12 Pages Posted: 1 Feb 2022
Auyelbek Iztayev
Almaty Technological University
Mariam Alimardanova
Almaty technological University
Bauyrzhan Iztayev
Almaty Technological University
Mira Yerzhanova
M. Kh. Dulaty Taraz Regional University
Ulbala Tungyshbayeva
Almaty technological University
Raushan Izteliyeva
Almaty Technological University
Sholpan Tursunbaeva
Almaty Technological University
Date Written: October 31, 2021
Abstract
Natural baking starter made from common ingredients such as flour, water and sugar is considered healthy. Any starter obtained by spontaneous fermentation is always a symbiosis of lactic acid bacteria and yeast. Lactic acid bacteria and yeast get along well together and in the course of their life enrich bread with the most valuable compounds, including short-chain organic acids, dietary fiber, essential amino acids, vitamins, etc. On the basis of the obtained research results, a recipe and technological modes for preparing dough for no yeast bakery products from wheat flour of the first grade with the use of ion-ozonized water, whey and natural starter have been developed. The dough was prepared in a safe way under pressure in a kneading-beating ion-ozone cavitation unit. The recipe components (raw materials) of the dough were loaded into the kneading body of the unit, then the dough was replaced for 5 minutes at a kneading body rotation frequency of 5 s-1 in different rotation modes and times. Then the ion-ozone treatment was carried out using an excess pressure of 0.40 MPa (cavitation) and the dough was knocked down. The nutritional value, safety and shelf life of the developed no yeast bakery products with the addition of whey, starter and ion-ozonized water have been determined. It was found that in terms of organoleptic and physicochemical indicators, bread samples prepared from first grade wheat flour and ion-ozonized water without yeast and using whey are almost 2 times inferior to the quality of the control sample. As a result, it was found that churning for 3–5 minutes at a kneading body rotation frequency of 4–5 s-1 will be the optimal mode for obtaining a no yeast dough made from first grade flour on starter with the addition of whey and ion-ozonized water.
Keywords: ion-ozonized, water, no yeast bread, wheat flour, accelerated technology, natural culture
Suggested Citation:
Iztayev, Auyelbek and Alimardanova, Mariam and Iztayev, Bauyrzhan and Yerzhanova, Mira and Tungyshbayeva, Ulbala and Izteliyeva, Raushan and Tursunbaeva, Sholpan, Development of an Innovative Technology for Accelerated Cooking of No Yeast Bread Using Ion-Ozonized Water (October 31, 2021). Eastern-European Journal of Enterprise Technologies, 5(11 (113), 85–96. doi:10.15587/1729-4061.2021.242838, 2021, Available at SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3960725





















Download This Paper
Open PDF in Browser
15 References
De Bellis , P Rizzello , C Sisto , A Valerio , F Lonigro , S Conte , A
Use of a Selected Leuconostoc Citreum Strain as a Starter for Making a
Yeast-Free" Bread. Foods , volume 8 , issue 2 Posted: 2019
K Ruttarattanamongkol , M E Wagner , S S H Rizvi
Properties of yeast free bread produced by supercritical fluid extrusion (SCFX) and vacuum baking
Innovative Food Science & Emerging Technologies , volume 12 , issue 4 , p. 542 - 550 Posted: 2011
A Musatti , C Mapelli , R Foschino , C Picozzi , M Rollini
Unconventional bacterial association for dough leavening
International Journal of Food Microbiology , volume 237 , p. 28 - 34 Posted: 2016
V Kapcsándi , E Hanczné Lakatos , B Sik , L Á Linka , R Székelyhidi
Antioxidant and polyphenol content of different Vitis vinifera seed cultivars and two facilities of production of a functional bakery product
Chemical Papers , volume 75 , issue 11 , p. 5711 - 5717 Posted: 2021
Load more
0 Citations
Do you have a job opening that you would like to promote on SSRN?
Place Job Opening
Paper statistics
DOWNLOADS
31
ABSTRACT VIEWS
228
15 References
PlumX Metrics
Related eJournals
Agricultural Economics eJournal
Follow
Agricultural Food Science & Food Groups eJournal
Follow
Feedback
Submit a Paper
Section 508 Text Only Pages
SSRN Quick Links
SSRN Solutions
Research Paper Series
Conference Papers
Partners in Publishing
Jobs & Announcements
Special Topic Hubs
SSRN Rankings
Top Papers
Top Authors
Top Organizations
About SSRN
Network Directors
Announcements
Contact us
FAQs
Copyright Terms and Conditions Privacy Policy
All content on this site: Copyright © 2023 Elsevier Inc., its licensors, and contributors. All rights are reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. For all open access content, the Creative Commons licensing terms apply.
We use cookies to help provide and enhance our service and tailor content.
To learn more, visit Cookie Settings.
We use cookies that are necessary to make our site work. We may also use additional cookies to analyze, improve, and personalize our content and your digital experience. For more information, see ourCookie Policy
Cookie Settings
Accept all cookies