Journals & Books
Help
Search
My account
Sign in
Access through your institution
Purchase PDF
Article preview
Abstract
Introduction
Section snippets
References (54)
Construction and Building Materials
Volume 438
, 9 August 2024, 137303
Life cycle assessment of transparent wood in building industry: a sustainable solution for global warming mitigation
Author links open overlay panel
Jiamin Wu a
,
Haoran Ye a
,
Suiyi Li a
,
Zeli Que a
,
Yucheng Peng b
,
Liping Cai a
,
Changlei Xia a
Show more
Add to Mendeley
Share
Cite
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.conbuildmat.2024.137303
Get rights and content
Highlights
•
Life cycle assessment of transparent wood is conducted
•
Lignin modification method for bleached wood production was greenest
•
Epoxy infiltration was the least environmentally harmful process
•
Environmental impacts were reduced by increasing cellulose volume fraction
•
Transparent wood environmental impact lower compared to traditional materials
Abstract
Transparent wood produced from renewable resources offers a sustainable alternative to conventional petroleum-based polymers for potential building industry applications such as rooftop structures, windows, and decorations. Here, we conducted a cradle-to-grave life cycle assessment (LCA) to characterize and quantify the environmental footprint in terms of global warming, acidification, cancer, noncancer, air pollutions, eutrophication, ecotoxicity, smog, natural resource depletion, habitat alteration, water intake and ozone depletion from production and disposal processes of transparent wood. The results of LCA showed that the most environmental-friendly transparent wood would be produced using the modified lignin bleaching method, epoxy infiltration, and increase in cellulose volume up to 65 %. In those processing conditions, the global warming impact was 57 %, 57 %, and 13 % lower than that by the transparent polymethyl methacrylate, polycarbonate, and polyethylene terephthalate, respectively. These findings suggest that transparent wood provides great opportunities to replace conventional transparent petroleum-based materials, thereby mitigating global warming, loss of biodiversity and ecosystem services to meet planetary health under the United Nations Sustainable Development Goals.
Introduction
A large amount of energy demands, and the increasing consumptions of fossil resources have led to an energy crisis and environmental concerns [1]. In particular, the energy consumption of the building sector, which encompasses lighting, cooling, heating, and other related aspects, is substantial as it accounts for around 40 % of worldwide energy usage [2], [3]. Besides, the production of building materials results in a significant release of greenhouse gases which directly contribute to alterations in the climate [4]. In addition, transparent plastic products are gaining an increasing market share in the glass industry for building construction applications due to their lightweight nature, exceptional mechanical strength, competitive pricing, effective daylighting and thermal management capabilities [5], [6]. For instance, polymethyl methacrylate (PMMA) materials are used for light shade roofs [7], polycarbonate (PC) panels are utilized for roofs, partitions or windows [6], and polyethylene terephthalate (PET) films are employed for transparent windows [8]. However, these non-biodegradable polymers are dependent on fossil fuel resources and exhibit long-lasting persistence after their services, thereby posing an ongoing environmental threat [9]. Thus, the exploration for cost-effective, eco-friendly, and renewable building materials is crucial to meet sustainable demands. Wood, a natural and sustainable material with exceptional structural benefits, has been employed as a significant building component for load-bearing structures throughout millennia [10], [11]. An emerging trend in the production of wood-based building materials is the innovative development of transparent wood composites, which possesses numerous merits such as low cost, excellent light transmittance, ideal mechanical strength and low thermal conductivities [12]. Transparent wood composites have gained recognition as potential engineering elements (e.g., for rooftop structures, windows, and decorations) in environmentally friendly buildings due to their integrated benefits and the aspiration to reduce reliance on conventional transparent synthetic polymers [13].
The manufacture of transparent wood involves two steps, namely the removal of light-absorbing lignin or modifying chromophores on lignin, and the impregnation of the index-matched polymer [14]. Numerous bleaching methods are widely used for delignification or lignin modification including acid sodium chlorite solution method (NaClO2 method) [15], sodium hydroxide (NaOH)/sodium sulfite (Na2SO3)/hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) solution method (NaOH/Na2SO3/H2O2 method) [16], hydrogen peroxide steam-modified delignification method (H2O2 steam-modified method) [17], and the lignin modification method using a lignin modification solution comprising H2O2, sodium silicate, magnesium sulfate (MgSO4), NaOH and diethylallyltriaminepenta acetic acid (DTPA) [18]. Furthermore, the literature review indicated that the extensively-used PMMA [19], epoxy [13] and polyvinyl alcohol (PVA) [20] were employed as index-matched polymers to infiltrate the bleached wood. Transparent wood offers new prospects for sustainable materials because of its remarkable characteristics and fascinating applications. However, the delignification or lignin modification process, as well as polymer impregnation were relatively chemical and energy-intensive, which can potentially impose environmental burdens [21]. Consequently, it is vital to take into account the environmental effects of the manufacturing process to be able to appraise the sustainability of transparent wood.
Life cycle assessment (LCA) is a widely recognized methodology for evaluating the environmental impact of products, processes, or services [22]. LCA facilitates the comprehensive examination of various environmental impacts, including climate change, eutrophication, tropospheric ozone, acidification, toxicological stress upon ecosystems and human health (HH) [23]. Recently, many studies using LCA to evaluate the environmental impacts of wood-based materials. For instance, Xia et al. (2019) [24] developed a clean production method for high-performance woody materials and confirmed that these woody materials decline by 1.72–667.06 and 7.34–636.21 folds through all categories of environmental impact, respectively, compared to the steel alloy and aluminum alloy materials by LCA. Additionally, Hu’s group [25] performed a LCA to contrast the environmental effects of 3D-molded wood and Al alloy, revealing that the 3D-molded wood exhibited significant reductions ranging from 59 % to 99 % across all environmental impact categories when compared to Al alloy. These findings suggested that switching from non-renewable materials to wood-based materials would lead to lower environmental impacts, as well as LCA evaluations may aid to boost the manufacture of sustainable materials.
Inspired by these earlier studies on the LCA of wood-based materials, it is therefore feasible to assess the environmental impacts associated with the production of transparent wood by LCA [26]. In this study, the different technologies for manufacturing transparent wood assessed with an environmental perspective by LCA. The primary purpose of the current research is to estimate the environmental effects of widely adopted delignification or lignin modification and infiltration technologies, as well as proportions of the wood templates for transparent wood production. It would contribute to creating the perfect strategy for producing transparent wood with minimized environmental burdens. Additionally, traditionally transparent PMMA, PC, and PET are garnering growing attention in the construction industry. Nevertheless, these polymers are non-biodegradable and heavily reliant on fossil fuel resources. For building applications, however, transparent wood derived from renewable resources holds the potential to serve as a viable substitute for PMMA, PC, and PET. Thus, a comparative LCA from cradle to grave was conducted to evaluate the possibilities of transparent wood materials as alternatives to these traditional transparent materials. This study may greatly assist in increasing the commercial viability of transparent wood as a replacement for traditional transparent materials.
Section snippets
Description of the transparent wood manufacturing technologies
Due to intense absorption and scattering of light, natural wood is not transparent in the visible spectrum range [27]. To make wood transparent, both absorption and scattering need to be eliminated. As depicted in Fig. 1a, the current reported manufacturing technologies mainly based on bleaching treatment of the natural wood species (such as Balsa, Basswood, Birchwood, Poplar, etc.) followed by infiltration of polymers with a refractive index matching the wood template [28]. After bleaching,
Comparative analysis of different bleaching methods for bleached wood manufacture
Fig. 4(a-m) displays the characterization results for environmental impacts of the bleached wood production using the NaClO2 method, NaOH/Na2SO3/H2O2 method, lignin modification method, and H2O2 steam-modified method, severally. The NaOH/Na2SO3/H2O2 method exhibits the highest environmental impact, as evidenced by its significantly high values across all categories. Conversely, the lignin modification method produces minimum environmental impacts due to the low impact values in most categories.
Conclusions
This work appraised the environmental impacts of the transparent wood manufacturing and disposal by the LCA method. The findings indicated that the most sustainable techniques for producing transparent wood involved lignin modification bleaching method, epoxy polymer infiltration, and increase in cellulose volume up to 65 %. Specifically, the lignin modification bleaching method achieved 54 %, 81 %, and 66 % lower total environmental impact than the NaClO2 method, NaOH/Na2SO3/H2O2 method, and H2
CRediT authorship contribution statement
Haoran Ye: Writing – review & editing, Validation, Formal analysis. Suiyi Li: Writing – review & editing. Jiamin Wu: Writing – original draft, Visualization, Validation, Methodology, Investigation, Formal analysis, Data curation. Changlei Xia: Writing – review & editing, Validation, Supervision, Project administration, Funding acquisition, Conceptualization. Yucheng Peng: Writing – review & editing. Liping Cai: Writing – review & editing. Zeli Que: Writing – review & editing.
Declaration of Competing Interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.
Acknowledgments
This work is supported by Chunhui Project from Education Ministry of China (HZKY20220180) and Postgraduate Research & Practice Innovation Program of Jiangsu Province (KYCX22-1082). We thank to the help from Prof. Christian Sonne, Aarhus University on editing this manuscript.
References (54)
C. Zhang et al.
Wood-cellulose-fiber-based functional materials for triboelectric nanogenerators
Nano Energy
(2021)
D. Madathil et al.
Consumer-focused solar-grid net zero energy buildings: a multi-objective weighted sum optimization and application for India
Sustain. Prod. Consum.
(2021)
Y. Wu et al.
Using lightweight cement composite and photocatalytic coating to reduce cooling energy consumption of buildings
Constr. Build. Mater.
(2017)
D.-h Kim et al.
Greener homes: factors underpinning Europeans' intention to live in multi-storey wooden buildings, Sustain
Prod. Consum.
(2023)
A.G.America Califano et al.
Mechanical behavior of recyclable polymeric specimens made by additive manufacturing
Procedia Struct. Integr.
(2024)
E. Moretti et al.
Polycarbonate panels for buildings: Experimental investigation of thermal and optical performance
Energy Build.
(2014)
S. Tao et al.
Ignition risk analysis of common building material cylindrical PMMA exposed to an external irradiation with in-depth absorption
Constr. Build. Mater.
(2020)
K. Chidambarampadmavathy et al.
Sustainable bio-plastic production through landfill methane recycling
Renew. Sust. Energ. Rev.
(2017)
F. Asdrubali et al.
A review of structural, thermo-physical, acoustical, and environmental properties of wooden materials for building applications
Build. Environ.
(2017)
M. Chutturi et al.
A comprehensive review of the synthesis strategies, properties, and applications of transparent wood as a renewable and sustainable resource
Sci. Total. Environ.
(2023)
View more references
Cited by (0)
View full text
© 2024 Elsevier Ltd. All rights are reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies.
Recommended articles
Behavior of CFRP composites and epoxy adhesives after long-term exposure to outdoor and laboratory-controlled environments
Construction and Building Materials, Volume 438, 2024, Article 137201
Aloys Dushimimana, …, Ricardo Cruz
A digital measurement method for mean texture depth of asphalt pavement by virtual sand patch test
Construction and Building Materials, Volume 438, 2024, Article 137308
Can Jin, …, Xu Yang
Enhancing chloride ion permeability resistance of recycled aggregate concrete through internal curing with glazed hollow beads
Construction and Building Materials, Volume 438, 2024, Article 137293
Xianxing Wang, …, Zhi Ge
Show 3 more articles
About ScienceDirect
Remote access
Shopping cart
Advertise
Contact and support
Terms and conditions
Privacy policy
Cookies are used by this site.
Cookie Settings
All content on this site: Copyright © 2024 Elsevier B.V., its licensors, and contributors. All rights are reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. For all open access content, the Creative Commons licensing terms apply.
We use cookies that are necessary to make our site work. We may also use additional cookies to analyze, improve, and personalize our content and your digital experience. For more information, see ourCookie Policy
Cookie Settings
Accept all cookies