eCommerce functions are currently unavailable. Our support teams are investigating and will restore functionality as soon as possible, we regret any inconvenience this may cause.
T&F eBooks
‍
Advanced Search
Login
About Us
Subjects
Browse
Products
Request a trial
Librarian Resources
What's New!!
HomeEnvironment & AgricultureAgriculture & Environmental SciencesAgricultureSustainable Postharvest Technologies for Fruits and VegetablesOzone Gas Technology for Fresh Fruits and Vegetables
Chapter
Ozone Gas Technology for Fresh Fruits and Vegetables
ByVijay Yadav Tokala
Book
Sustainable Postharvest Technologies for Fruits and Vegetables
Edition 1st Edition
First Published 2024
Imprint CRC Press
Pages 13
eBook ISBN 9781003370376
Share
ABSTRACT
Post-Covid, there has been a rapidly increasing trend of health awareness, and consumers are including increased proportions of fresh fruit and vegetables in their diets. Due to the nutritional composition and physiological activities of fresh fruit and vegetables, they are prone to microbial infections and undergo senescence at rapid rates compared to grain crops. Traditionally, fresh fruits are dipped in chlorine or fungicide solutions to reduce microbial load, but any residues of these chemicals left on the fruit surface can lead to serious health issues in the long run. Produce treated with ozone do not leave behind any harmful residues, as the final product is breathable oxygen. The application of ozone not only reduces surface microbial load but also induces changes in the physiological activities and quality parameters of fruit and vegetables. This chapter lists the different physiological effects of gaseous ozone treatment on fresh horticultural produce. The hazard regulations while using ozone gas treatments have also been briefly discussed.
Previous Chapter
Next Chapter
You do not have access to this content currently. Please click 'Get Access' button to see if you or your institution have access to this content.
GET ACCESS

To purchase a print version of this book for personal use or request an inspection copy 
GO TO ROUTLEDGE.COM

Policies
Privacy Policy
Terms & Conditions
Cookie Policy
Journals
Taylor & Francis Online
Corporate
Taylor & Francis Group
Help & Contact
Students/Researchers
Librarians/Institutions
Connect with us
Registered in England & Wales No. 3099067
5 Howick Place | London | SW1P 1WG
© 2024 Informa UK Limited