Log in
or
Register
Subscribe to journal
Get new issue alerts
Secondary Logo
Journal Logo
Articles
Advanced Search
Articles & Issues
For Authors
Journal Info
Previous Article
Next Article




ORIGINAL ARTICLES
Computed Tomography–Guided Dorsal Root Ganglion Ozone Injection Combined With Pulsed Radiofrequency for Acute Herpes Zoster Neuralgia Treatment of Middle-aged and Elderly People
A Randomized, Double-blinded, Controlled Trial
Wang, Ruxiang MD*,†; Xia, Zhangtian MD*,†; Ma, Ying MD*,†; Huang, Bing MD†; Yao, Ming PhD†; Ma, Ling MD†
Author Information
The Clinical Journal of Pain 40(8):p 469-477, August 2024. | DOI: 10.1097/AJP.0000000000001226
OPEN
Metrics
Abstract
Objectives: 
To investigate the efficacy and safety of pulsed radiofrequency of the dorsal root ganglion combined with ozone injection for treating acute herpes zoster (HZ) neuralgia in middle-aged and elderly adults.
Methods: 
A total of 164 middle-aged and elderly patients with acute HZ were randomly assigned to 2 groups: the pulsed radiofrequency combined with ozone injection group (group A) and the pulsed radiofrequency group (group B). The therapeutic effects were evaluated using Numeric Rating Scale (NRS) scores and the average doses of gabapentin (mg/d) preoperatively and 1 day, 2 weeks, 4 weeks, 12 weeks, and 24 weeks postoperatively. The incidence of clinically significant postherpetic neuralgia (PHN) and complications in the 2 groups were recorded.
Results: 
The data showed that the NRS scores and the doses of gabapentin after treatment were significantly lower when compared with the baseline values in both groups. Compared with group B, the NRS scores and the doses of postoperative gabapentin were significantly lower in group A. The incidence of PHN was significantly lower at weeks 4, 12, and 24 in group A than in group B. No adverse reactions occurred in either of the 2 groups post-treatment.
Conclusions: 
The results indicated that ozone injection in the dorsal root ganglion combined with pulsed radiofrequency therapy was more effective in treating acute HZ neuralgia in middle-aged and elderly adults. It provides patients with longer-lasting pain relief, decreased incidence of PHN and the doses of medication, and improved quality of life than with Pulsed Radiofrequency treatment.
Herpes zoster (HZ) is caused by the reactivation of the varicella-zoster virus. The primary infection with varicella-zoster virus is latent in the dorsal root and cranial ganglia; when the immune function of the body declines, these viruses reactivate and replicate, resulting in inflammatory responses in the ganglia and peripheral nerves; which, in turn, results in tissue damage in the corresponding distribution areas of the nerves.1–3 The annual incidence of HZ is 1 to 3 per 1000 in young adults and 4 to 12 per 1000 in elderly adults.4 Approximately 9 to 34 of 100 individuals with shingles may develop postherpetic neuralgia (PHN), and the incidence increases with age.5 PHN is the most common and serious complication of HZ. It seriously affects the quality of life of patients and is the primary reason for clinical treatment.6,7 A previous study8 reported that early HZ treatment decreases acute pain and PHN incidence and accelerates the healing process of rash. Therefore, early treatment is recommended to improve the therapeutic effects and prevent PHN occurrence.
Early treatment can be achieved through pharmacological intervention. The tricyclic antielipetic pregabalin and gabapentin are recommended as the first-line medications, whereas nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs and opioids are frequently used to suppress pain. However, medication alone remains insufficient for most patients. Although nerve blocks and epidural injections can be used to temporarily relieve patients’ pain, they do not exert any significant effect on PHN prevention.9 Moreover, electrical stimulation of the spinal cord may decrease PHN incidence; however, its use is limited in clinical settings owing to the risk of infection and the expensive medical costs that may be associated with the placement of an electrode in the spinal canal. Pulsed Radiofrequency (PRF) is a neuromodulation technique, wherein alternating and repetitive pulsed currents emitted by a radiofrequency instrument act around the diseased nerves to modulate disturbed electrical signals, thereby exerting analgesic effects.9,10 Because the temperature of the electrode head end is <42 °C, it rarely results in nerve tissue damage. However, some patients continue to have poor results and require additional treatments.
Ozone is a strong oxidizing agent with analgesic, anti-inflammatory, and immunomodulatory effects.11 Owing to these remarkable biological effects, ozone is currently used to treat various pain disorders, including musculoskeletal disorders, vascular disorders, rheumatic immune disorders, neuropathic pain, and metabolic disorders.12–14 A previous study reported that ozone therapy has almost no side effects and is safe for clinical application.15 Presently, it has been reported that ozone therapy can relieve HZ-associated neuralgia.16,17 However, previous studies were retrospective and conducted on a small sample size. Therefore, in the present study, we focused on the clinical efficacy of dorsal root ganglion (DRG) ozone injection combined with pulsed radiofrequency for treating acute HZ neuralgia in middle-aged and elderly adults, as well as explored its preventive effect on the occurrence of PHN.
METHODS
Study Design
The current study was a prospective, randomized, controlled, clinical trial. It was approved by the Medical Ethics Committee of our Hospital. This study recruited patients who were treated at the Affiliated Hospital of Jiaxing University from February 2022 to 2023 with a diagnosis of acute HZ neuralgia. All patients provided their written informed consent.
Inclusion and Exclusion Criteria
The inclusion criteria were as follows: (1) patients clinically diagnosed with acute zoster pain, (2) disease duration of ≤30 days, (3) patients age 40 years or older, (4) numerical rating scale (NRS) score ≥4 before the operation, and (5) those who completely understood the risks of surgeries and agreed to undergo computed tomography (CT)-guided PRF or ozone injection. The exclusion criteria were as follows: (1) individuals with cardiopulmonary insufficiency, poor blood sugar control, or other severe diseases, (2) those with puncture site infection, (3) those who were allergic to lidocaine, ozone, and other related drugs, (4) those who refused to provide treatment information and clinical data for scientific research, and (5) those who received PRF or other minimally invasive treatments.
Randomization and Blinding
A total of 170 patients were enrolled in this trial, and they were assigned randomly to 2 groups through a computer-generated random allocation sequence: (1) pulsed radiofrequency combined with ozone injection group (group A, n = 81) and (2) pulsed radiofrequency group (group B, n = 83). Patients in the 2 groups received corresponding treatments and follow-ups at different time points, as shown in Figure 1. The procedures were performed by the same investigator, and all follow-ups were performed by another investigator. Patients and investigators who were in charge of the follow-up and data collection were unaware of the randomization. The post-treatment assessment was administered by a nurse who was not involved in this study.
FIGURE 1: Flow diagram depicting the study protocol.
PROCEDURES
In both patient groups, the operation was performed under the guidance of a CT scan. The patients were asked to lie in the prone position on the CT scan bed with soft pillows under the chest or axilla. Oxygen was continuously administered through a nasal cannula, and the vital signs were monitored throughout the procedure. Depending on the nerve involved in the lesion, body surface localization landmarks were determined, with the most painful segment located at the center and one segment extending above and below. The puncture site was centered, disinfected with a towel, and anesthetized with local infiltration of 1% lidocaine. Then, under the guidance of a CT scan, the upper one-fourth of the intervertebral foramen was used as the puncture target for the trocar needle for PRF18 (20 G, 150 mm long, and working end length of 10 mm; Fig. 2A). The needle was entered along the indicated path to a depth of no more than half of the lateral mass of the same vertebral body. After the tip of the needle was in place, a radio-frequency instrument (Baylis Medical Inc.) was used as follows (1) sensory test: voltage <0.5 V and frequency of 50 Hz; the innervated area was observed for pain, swelling, numbness, or tingling sensations and (2) motor test: voltage <0.5 V and frequency of 2 Hz; if tremors and pulsation were induced in the trunk muscle fibers, the puncture site was located near the target nerve. After determining the location of the puncture site, the temperature, time, pulse width, and frequency of PRF were set to 42 °C, 300 s, 20 ms, and 2 Hz, respectively.7 After completing PRF stimulation, the electrode core was withdrawn, with no aspiration of blood, gas, or fluid. Thereafter, 0.5 mL of a contrast solution (General Electric Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd., 300 mg/mL) was injected, and CT revealed no intravascular injection (Fig. 2B). After completing the PRF procedure described earlier, 5 mL of the treatment solution (100 mg of 2% lidocaine hydrochloride [Hunan Kelun Pharmaceutical Co. Ltd., 0.1 g/5 mL], 500 µg of methylcobalamin [Eisai Pharmaceutical Co. Ltd., 0.5 mg/mL] injection, 1 mL compound betamethasone [Maanshan Fengyuan Pharmaceutical Co. Ltd., 4 mg/mL] injection, and 3 mL of 30% iodohydrin [General Electric Pharmaceutical Co. Ltd., 300 mg/mL]; dilute to 15 mL with 0.9% saline) was injected into each of the affected nerve for a total of 3 ganglionic segments, based on PRF localization. Once again, CT revealed good contrast and drug diffusion, covering the pain-related neurospinal segments, and reconfirmed the absence of intravascular injection. After removing the needle, the puncture site was covered with an adjuvant. After 20 minutes of observation, no adverse reactions were observed; therefore, the patients were shifted to the ward. In group A, after completing the above mentioned treatment, 3 mL of ozone (Oxygen-Ozone Therapeutic Instrument, Shandong Zibo Yuehua Medical Instrument Co. Ltd., 40 μg/mL) was, in addition, injected into each treated nerve segment. CT revealed good ozone diffusion (Fig. 2C). After removing the needle, the puncture site was covered with excipients. After 20 minutes of observation, no adverse effects were observed; therefore, the patients were shifted to the ward.
FIGURE 2: The needle was inserted into the upper one-fourth area of the corresponding intervertebral foramen. The CT scan verifies that the inserted needle is at the target site (A and C). Comparison of CT scan images at the end of operation between the 2 groups (B and D). The orange arrow indicates the ozone position. Puncture site indicates cervical vertebra. A and B: group B; C and D: group A. CT indicates computed tomography.
Data Collection and Follow-up
The primary outcome was the NRS scores and the incidence of clinically significant PHN. The NRS scores were recorded from 0 to 10, with 0 = no pain and 10 = the most severe pain imaginable. The NRS scores were evaluated before treatment and 1 day, 2 weeks, 4 weeks, 12 weeks, and 24 weeks after the treatment. Based on previous studies, clinically significant PHN was defined as persistent pain according to NRS with an intensity of ≥3.9 The proportion of clinically significant PHN at weeks 4, 12, and 24 after the end of treatment was compared using the same criteria. The secondary outcome was the average dose of gabapentin. For the purpose of analysis, the dosage of the oral drugs was converted to equivalent doses of gabapentin before treatment. The average doses of gabapentin were observed and recorded preoperation and then at 1 day, 2 weeks, 4 weeks, 12 weeks, and 24 weeks postoperation.
STATISTICAL ANALYSES
Sample Size
In our pilot study, the incidence of clinically significant PHN in the PRF combined with ozone injection group was 7.1%, and the incidence of clinically significant PHN in the PRF group was 25%, hence the difference between the incidence of clinically significant PHN in the 2 groups was 19.7%. Based on this information, we calculated that the estimated sample number was at least 63 in each group, which provided 80% power and a level of statistical significance of 0.05 (α = 0.05).
Data Analyses
All data were analyzed using SPSS 26.0 (IBM). The Shapiro-Wilk test was performed to determine whether the measurements were normally distributed. The normally distributed data were expressed as the mean ± SD, whereas non-normally distributed data were expressed as the median (quartiles). The Mann-Whitney U test or independent t test was performed for continuous variables. Furthermore, the χ2 test or Fisher exact test was performed for categorical variables. Pain intensity over time was assessed using repeated measures analysis of variance. P <0.05 was considered to indicate statistical significance.
RESULTS
Patient Characteristics
In total,