Product & Services
Subscribe
Submit a paper
Browse
Rankings
Blog↗
Contact
Create account
Sign in
  This is a preprint article, it offers immediate access but has not been peer reviewed.
Download This Paper
Open PDF in Browser
Add Paper to My Library
Share:
Diurnal Hourly Near-Surface Ozone Concentration Derived from Geostationary Satellite in China
24 Pages Posted: 21 Jun 2024
Yi Zhang
Wuhan University
Lin Zang
Wuhan University
Jie Song
Wuhan University
Jingru Yang
Wuhan University
Ying Yang
Wuhan University
Feiyue Mao
Wuhan University
Abstract
Near-surface O3 is a harmful atmospheric pollutant and a key component of urban photochemical pollution. The availability of satellite ozone concentration products is predominantly restricted to daytime, resulting in a lack of understanding of nighttime ozone pollution (e.g. nocturnal ozone enhancement events). This research leverages 5-km bright temperatures derived from Advanced Himawari Images (AHI) on the Himawari-8 satellite, in conjunction with auxiliary data, to estimate 24-hour near-surface O3 in China for 2020. The model achieves an average 5-fold cross-validation R2 of 0.92. Comparative analysis with on-site observations reveals that the model has low relative errors between 8:00 and 21:00 LT. The estimated O3 maps depict a consistent 24-hour variation pattern, characterized by high and most fluctuating concentrations during the daytime, reaching a peak around 16:00 LT, which is primarily due to the increased photochemical reactions and the O3 accumulation in the mid-afternoon. In the daytime of summer, high surface ozone concentrations are mainly contributed by June. The elevated levels of O3 are predominantly found in central China, particularly in the Beijing-Tianjin-Hebei region and Inner Mongolia. It can also be seen that although the highest average daytime surface O3 concentration occurs in summer, the highest nighttime concentration is observed in spring, which may be attributed to the frequent occurrence of horizontal transport and vertical mixing of O3. This study holds promise in providing comprehensive round-the-clock surface O3 data across China, thereby enhancing our understanding of diurnal ground-level O3 variations.
Keywords: Himawari-8, surface O3, diurnal, cloud detection, hourly O3
Suggested Citation:
Zhang, Yi and Zang, Lin and Song, Jie and Yang, Jingru and Yang, Ying and Mao, Feiyue, Diurnal Hourly Near-Surface Ozone Concentration Derived from Geostationary Satellite in China. Available at SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4872591 or http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.4872591












Download This Paper
Open PDF in Browser
41 References
C An , H Li , Y Ji , W Chu , X Yan , F Chai
A review on nocturnal surface ozone enhancement: Characterization, formation causes, and atmospheric chemical effects
Science of The Total Environment , volume 921 Posted: 2024
K Bessho , K Date , M Hayashi , A Ikeda , T Imai , H Inoue , Y Kumagai , T Miyakawa , H Murata , T Ohno , A Okuyama , R Oyama , Y Sasaki , Y Shimazu , K Shimoji , Y Sumida , M Suzuki , H Taniguchi , H Tsuchiyama , D Uesawa , H Yokota , R Yoshida
An Introduction to Himawari-8/9-Japan's New-Generation Geostationary Meteorological Satellites
Journal of the Meteorological Society of Japan. Ser. II , volume 94 , p. 151 - 183 Posted: 2016
B Chen , Y Wang , J Huang , L Zhao , R Chen , Z Song , J Hu
Estimation of nearsurface ozone concentration and analysis of main weather situation in China based on machine learning model and Himawari-8 TOAR data
Science of The Total Environment , volume 864 Posted: 2023
G Chi , B Huang , Y Shi , X Chen , Q Li , J Zhu
Detecting ozone effects in four wheat cultivars using hyperspectral measurements under fully open-air field conditions
Remote Sensing of Environment , volume 184 , p. 329 - 336 Posted: 2016
Load more
0 Citations
Do you have a job opening that you would like to promote on SSRN?
Place Job Opening
Paper statistics
DOWNLOADS
5
ABSTRACT VIEWS
22
41 References
PlumX Metrics
Related eJournals
Environmental Pollution & Prevention eJournal
Follow
Feedback
Submit a Paper
Section 508 Text Only Pages
SSRN Quick Links
SSRN Solutions
Research Paper Series
Conference Papers
Partners in Publishing
Jobs & Announcements
Special Topic Hubs
SSRN Rankings
Top Papers
Top Authors
Top Organizations
About SSRN
Network Directors
Announcements
Contact us
FAQs
Copyright Terms and Conditions Privacy Policy
All content on this site: Copyright © 2023 Elsevier Inc., its licensors, and contributors. All rights are reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. For all open access content, the Creative Commons licensing terms apply.
We use cookies to help provide and enhance our service and tailor content.
To learn more, visit Cookie Settings.
We use cookies that are necessary to make our site work. We may also use additional cookies to analyze, improve, and personalize our content and your digital experience. For more information, see ourCookie Policy
Cookie Settings
Accept all cookies