Journals & Books
Help
Search
My account
Sign in
Access through your institution
Purchase PDF
Article preview
Abstract
Introduction
Section snippets
References (45)
Cited by (22)
Journal of Cereal Science
Volume 79
, January 2018, Pages 527-533
Characterization of oil extracted from whole grain flour treated with ozone gas
Author links open overlay panel
Mohammed Obadi a
,
Ke-Xue Zhu a
,
Wei Peng a
,
Anwar Noman a b
,
Khalid Mohammed a
,
Hui-Ming Zhou a
Show more
Add to Mendeley
Share
Cite
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcs.2017.12.007
Get rights and content
Highlights
•
We did the chemical and physicochemical properties of oil extracted from whole grain flour treated and untreated with ozone gas such as fatty acid composition, acid value, peroxide value, p-anisidine value, lipase activity and volatile compounds.
•
We also have been analyzed the total phenols and antioxidant activities.
Abstract
We treated whole grain flour (WGF) with ozone gas applied at 5 g/h over intervals of 0, 5, 15, 35, and 45 min. We extracted oil from whole grain flour treated and untreated with ozone gas to investigate how the ozone affected the fatty acid composition. The fatty acid value decreased in the treated flour, whereas the peroxide and p-inisidine values increased with ozone gas treatment. The lipase activity was lower in oil extracted from the flour that had been ozonated for more than 35 min compared to the control sample. We also observed levels of oxidation in the volatile compounds heptanal, hexanal, tetradecane, decanal, 1-hexanol, and nonanal after ozone treatment. The oils extracted from the ozone-treated flour showed higher phenolic content and antioxidant activity.
Introduction
According to the American Association of Cereal Chemists (AACC, 1999), whole grains comprise the intact, ground, cracked or flaked caryopsis and include three primary components (endosperm, germ, and bran) that are similar to the intact caryopsis. The endosperm forms the largest part of the grain and consists of carbohydrates, proteins, and small amounts of B vitamins and minerals. The germ also known as the embryo, contains vitamins, phytochemicals, antioxidants such as vitamin E, and fats. The bran is the external covering of the grain, which protects the germ and endosperm. It includes dietary fiber, antioxidants, vitamins, and minerals (Okarter and Liu, 2010). These nutrients not only offer a readily available energy source but also provide the body's need for dietary fiber, resistant starch, essential amino acids, and macrominerals (Beloshapka et al., 2016). Whole wheat bran and germ contain a variety of enzymes, such as lipase and lipoxygenase. Wheat germ has high nutritional value, but has a short shelf life because of the decomposition of lipids into free fatty, acids; hence, whole wheat lipids are more likely to be oxidized (Doblado-Maldonado et al., 2012), and the inactivation of lipase and lipoxigenase is an essential prerequisite for long-term storage of whole wheat flour. Because lipid oxidation in whole grain products can contribute substantially to loss of product quality, it is important to improve the storage stability of whole grain flour (Pomeranz, 1980). Ozone has been used in many industrial processes as an environmentally friendly disinfectant, including for food processing, water treatment, and environmental decontamination (Guzel-seydim et al., 2004). Ozone was declared Generally Recognized as Safe (GRAS) in 1997 by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) and its use is permitted as a direct food additive in food applications in some countries. It can be safely used in food processing in both its gaseous and dissolved ozone. The use of ozone on wheat flour has been attempted as a strategy to increase the quality of the flour, particularly the rheological properties and bread quality (Sandhu et al., 2011). Violleau et al. (2012) reported that the wheat ozonation process can efficiently modify bread dough quality and wheat protein. Because of its strong oxidizing properties, ozone can alter the flour components by oxidizing the sulfhydryl group (-SH) of amino acids gluten proteins, and hydroxyl groups in the starch, as well as by oxidizing the polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFAs) to peroxides (Guzel-seydim et al., 2004). Obadi et al. (2016) studied the effects of ozone gas on the physical and chemical properties of gluten proteins. The authors concluded that wheat proteins treated with ozone gas at 5 L/min for 60 min had deteriorated wheat protein quality. Sandhu et al. (2012) reported that ozone treatment oxidized wheat lipids and produced a brighter less yellow wheat flour compared to the control wheat flour. Naito (1989) observed that ozone treatment at >5 and > 50 ppm decreased unsaturated fatty acid content and increased the peroxide value in lipids in dried bean paste and flours. To date, most studies have been conducted using ozone as an oxidant on isolated starch (An and King, 2009, Chan et al., 2011, Sandhu et al., 2012, Gozé et al., 2016). In this study, We valuated the fatty acid composition, volatile compounds, lipase activity, primary and secondary oxidation products and antioxidant activities of the oils extracted from ozone-treated and untreated whole grain flour (WGF) flour to investigate the effects of ozone treatment on the oils.
Section snippets
Sample collection and preparation
The WGF used in this study was obtained from Chu Han Grains Industry Co., Ltd. The grains were milled using a cyclone mill (Chuangli Corp., Hangzhou, China) to obtain WGF, which was then packed in laminated pouches for further analysis. The moisture (13.05%) and protein (12.16%) contents of the WGF were determined according to approved methods of the AACC (2000). The flour was not bleached and did not contain any added ingredients. All chemicals used in the analytical procedures were of highest
Effects of ozonation on fatty acid composition
The major components of the fatty acids were palmitic oleic and linoleic acids, which constituted 94% of the fatty acids. The whole wheat lipids, contained relatively high concentrations of PUFAs, particularly linoleic fatty acid (55%), which is comparable to wheat germ oil, which contains approximately 80% unsaturated fatty acids, including oleic, linoleic, and linolenic acids (Niu et al., 2013). Hence, WGF oil is a good source of PUFAs. The predominant unsaturated fatty acid observed in flour
Conclusion
Ozone gas treatment of WGF liberated phenolic compounds, in the oils extracted from the WGF leading to an increase in polyphenol content and improvement in the antioxidant capacity. We investigated the fatty acid composition with increasing ozonation time. The AV of oil extracted from the treated WGF was significantly lower (P > .05) than that from the untreated WGF. Lipase activity was lower in oil extracted from WGF treated with ozone gas at 45 min when compared to the control sample. We
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare that they do not have any conflict of interest.
Ethical review
“This study does not involve any human or animal testing”.
Informed consent
Written informed consent was obtained from all study participants.
Acknowledgements
The authors would like to acknowledge the Priority Academic Program Development of Jiangsu, Higher Education Institutions, Wuxi city, Jiangsu province, People's Republic of China. We are also grateful to all the staff and students of the Research Centre of Convenience Foods and its Quality Improvement laboratory.
Research data for this article
Data not available / Data will be made available on request
Further information on research data
References (45)
R. Bruni et al.
Chemical composition and biological activities of Ishpingo essential oil, a traditional Ecuadorian spice from Ocotea quixos (Lam.) Kosterm. (Lauraceae) flower calices
Food Chem.
(2004)
H.T. Chan et al.
Molecular structure, rheological and thermal characteristics of ozone-oxidized starch
Food Chem.
(2011)
A.F. Doblado-Maldonado et al.
Key issues and challenges in whole wheat flour milling and storage
J. Cereal Sci.
(2012)
E.N. Frankel
Volatile lipid oxidation products
Prog. Lipid Res.
(1983)
M.C. García-Martínez et al.
Volatile oxidation compounds in a conjugated linoleic acid-rich oil
Food Chem.
(2009)
P. Gozé et al.
Starch characterization after ozone treatment of wheat grains
J. Cereal Sci.
(2016)
Z. Guzel-seydim et al.
Use of ozone in a pilotscale plant for textile wastewater pre-treatment: physico-chemical efficiency, degradation by-products identification and environmental toxicity of treated wastewater
Lebenson Wiss Technol.
(2004)
K. Hayat et al.
Effect of microwave treatment on phenolic content and antioxidant activity of citrus mandarin pomace
Food Chem.
(2010)
S.C. Lee et al.
Effect of far-infrared radiation and heat treatment on the antioxidant activity of water extracts from peanut hulls
Food Chem.
(2006)
Q. Liu et al.
Antioxidant activities of barley seeds extracts
Food Chem.
(2007)
View more references
Cited by (22)
Applications of ozonation in the food industry
2022, Non-thermal Food Processing Operations: Unit Operations and Processing Equipment in the Food Industry
Show abstract
Technologies for disinfection of food grains: Advances and way forward
2021, Food Research International
Citation Excerpt :
It has been postulated that the oxidative nature of ozone allows it to react with the double bond in carotenoid pigment resulting in color changes (Wang et al., 2016). It has also been found that the linoleic acid in wheat flour can be effectively oxidized by ozone (at 5 g.h−1 for 45 min) that could affect the aromatic characteristics of the flour (Obadi et al., 2018). Ozone fumigation of bulk stored wheat grains was analysed for the infestation of common insect Rhyzopertha dominica (Mishra et al., 2019).
Show abstract
Effect of gaseous ozone treatment on the microbial and physicochemical properties of buckwheat-based composite flour and shelf-life extension of fresh noodles
2020, Journal of Cereal Science
Citation Excerpt :
The score of 8.4 of the overall acceptability in the control group was higher than those of the treated groups at the first day of storage, which might be due to the higher aroma score (typical FBNs smell) of the control group than those of the treated groups, as was observed in Supplementary Fig. 1. Another study found that concentration of volatile compounds, such as heptanal and hexanal increased (which is considered undesirable) in the flour after ozone treatment, which could reduce the aroma of the noodles (Obadi et al., 2018a). However, with the prolongation of the storage time, the aroma score of the control gradually decreased and odors gradually increased (likely caused by the microbial action), and led to the reduction of overall acceptability.
Show abstract
Mature chemical analysis methods for food chemical properties evaluation
2019, Evaluation Technologies for Food Quality
Show abstract
Effect of ozone treatment on the quality of grain products
2018, Food Chemistry
Citation Excerpt :
The treatment decreased the acid value and lipase activity, while increasing the peroxide value and p-anisidine value of the lipids. Volatile compounds related to lipid oxidation, such as heptanal and hexanal, were observed in increasing concentration in the flour after ozone treatment (Obadi et al., 2018). It appeared that lipids in wheat kernels were much better protected by the grain structure than those in flour, and that lipids in maize were more susceptible to ozone than those in wheat.
Show abstract
Applications of Ozone in Food Processing
2024, Emerging Technologies for the Food Industry: Advances in Nonthermal Processing Technologies: Volume 2
View all citing articles on Scopus
View full text
© 2017 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
Recommended articles
Mixolab, retrogradation and digestibility behavior of chapatti made from hulless barley flours
Journal of Cereal Science, Volume 79, 2018, pp. 383-389
Jessy Moza, Hardeep Singh Gujral
Ozone initiated heterogeneous oxidation of unsaturated carboxylic acids by ATR-FTIR spectroscopy
Spectrochimica Acta Part A: Molecular and Biomolecular Spectroscopy, Volume 214, 2019, pp. 177-183
Xiaoyan Gao, …, Yong Liu
Variability in defence mechanism operating in three wheat cultivars having different levels of sensitivity against elevated ozone
Environmental and Experimental Botany, Volume 155, 2018, pp. 66-78
Adeeb Fatima, …, Shashi Bhushan Agrawal
Show 3 more articles
Article Metrics
Citations
Citation Indexes:
21
Captures
Readers:
37
View details
About ScienceDirect
Remote access
Shopping cart
Advertise
Contact and support
Terms and conditions
Privacy policy
Cookies are used by this site.
Cookie Settings
All content on this site: Copyright © 2024 Elsevier B.V., its licensors, and contributors. All rights are reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. For all open access content, the Creative Commons licensing terms apply.
We use cookies that are necessary to make our site work. We may also use additional cookies to analyze, improve, and personalize our content and your digital experience. For more information, see ourCookie Policy
Cookie Settings
Accept all cookies