Our website uses cookies to enhance your experience. By continuing to use our site, or clicking "Continue," you are agreeing to our Cookie Policy | Continue
JAMA Network Open
JAMA Network Open
Sign In
contents icon
CONTENTS
figure icon
FIGURES /
TABLES
attach icon
SUPPLEMENTAL
CONTENT
references icon
REFERENCES
related icon
RELATED
comments icon
COMMENTS
Download PDF
Comment
Top of Article
Key Points
Abstract
Introduction
Methods
Results
Discussion
Conclusions
Article Information
References
1.

This Issue
Views 1,894
Citations 0
135
PDF
More
Cite
Permissions
Original Investigation Environmental Health
June 28, 2024
Source-Specific Air Pollution and Loss of Independence in Older Adults Across the US
Boya Zhang, PhD1; Carlos F. Mendes de Leon, PhD2; Kenneth M. Langa, MD, PhD3,4,5,6; et al
Author Affiliations Article Information
JAMA Netw Open. 2024;7(6):e2418460. doi:10.1001/jamanetworkopen.2024.18460
Key Points
Question  Are long-term exposures to air pollution from different emission sources associated with loss of independence in later life?
Findings  In this cohort study of 25 314 adults older than 50 years, higher residential levels of traffic-related air pollutants, including particulate matter less than 2.5 μm in diameter (PM2.5) from road traffic, PM2.5 from nonroad traffic, and nitrogen dioxide, were associated with greater risks of lost independence.
Meaning  These findings suggest that traffic-related air pollution may be associated with the likelihood of needing help for lost independence among older adults and that interventions to reduce pollution exposure may be associated with a prolonged ability to live independently.
Abstract
Importance  Air pollution is a recognized risk factor associated with chronic diseases, including respiratory and cardiovascular conditions, which can lead to physical and cognitive impairments in later life. Although these losses of function, individually or in combination, reduce individuals’ likelihood of living independently, little is known about the association of air pollution with this critical outcome.
Objective  To investigate associations between air pollution and loss of independence in later life.
Design, Setting, and Participants  This cohort study was conducted as part of the Environmental Predictors Of Cognitive Health and Aging study and used 1998 to 2016 data from the Health and Retirement Study. Participants included respondents from this nationally representative, population-based cohort who were older than 50 years and had not previously reported a loss of independence. Analyses were performed from August 31 to October 15, 2023.
Exposures  Mean 10-year pollutant concentrations (particulate matter less than 2.5 μm in diameter [PM2.5] or ranging from 2.5 μm to 10 μm in diameter [PM10-2.5], nitrogen dioxide [NO2], and ozone [O3]) were estimated at respondent addresses using spatiotemporal models along with PM2.5 levels from 9 emission sources.
Main Outcomes and Measures  Loss of independence was defined as newly receiving care for at least 1 activity of daily living or instrumental activity of daily living due to health and memory problems or moving to a nursing home. Associations were estimated with generalized estimating equation regression adjusting for potential confounders.
Results  Among 25 314 respondents older than 50 years (mean [SD] baseline age, 61.1 [9.4] years; 11 208 male [44.3%]), 9985 individuals (39.4%) experienced lost independence during a mean (SD) follow-up of 10.2 (5.5) years. Higher exposure levels of mean concentration were associated with increased risks of lost independence for total PM2.5 levels (risk ratio [RR] per 1-IQR of 10-year mean, 1.05; 95% CI, 1.01-1.10), PM2.5 levels from road traffic (RR per 1-IQR of 10-year mean, 1.09; 95% CI, 1.03-1.16) and nonroad traffic (RR per 1-IQR of 10-year mean, 1.13; 95% CI, 1.03-1.24), and NO2 levels (RR per 1-IQR of 10-year mean, 1.05; 95% CI, 1.01-1.08). Compared with other sources, traffic-generated pollutants were most consistently and robustly associated with loss of independence; only road traffic-related PM2.5 levels remained associated with increased risk after adjustment for PM2.5 from other sources (RR per 1-IQR increase in 10-year mean concentration, 1.10; 95% CI, 1.00-1.21). Other pollutant-outcome associations were null, except for O3 levels, which were associated with lower risks of lost independence (RR per 1-IQR increase in 10-year mean concentration, 0.94; 95% CI, 0.92-0.97).
Conclusions and Relevance  This study found that long-term exposure to air pollution was associated with the need for help for lost independence in later life, with especially large and consistent increases in risk for pollution generated by traffic-related sources. These findings suggest that controlling air pollution could be associated with diversion or delay of the need for care and prolonged ability to live independently.
Introduction
Functional decline is common in aging populations, arising from subclinical pathologies and chronic diseases across multiple organs.1-3 As functional limitations due to health or memory problems increase in severity, affected individuals can experience substantial difficulties in their ability to live independently without help. Loss in independence is important given that it often results in large emotional and economic burdens for older adults, their families, and society.4-6 Nearly 30% of Medicare enrollees in the US receive help due to health problems with mobility, routine household activities, or basic self-care activities.7 Given the large and growing older adult population, interventions to prevent or delay the need for help due to lost independence are becoming increasingly important.
Air pollutants have well-established relationships with chronic health conditions, including cardiovascular diseases (CVDs), respiratory diseases, and diabetes, as well as the pathophysiological processes that give rise to these conditions.8-11 Chronic disease often leads to impairments in physical and cognitive function through mechanisms such as increased pain, reduced lung function, poor circulation, and disturbed sleep that can reduce physical endurance and mental acuity.12-14 Because functional limitations lead to lost independence, it is plausible that air pollution contributes to loss of independence; however, this has not been well-studied. Additionally, the loss of independence may better reflect the cumulative burden of air pollution in later life across multiple clinical and subclinical outcomes.
In this study, we leveraged a nationally representative cohort study to investigate associations of long-term concentrations of particulate matter air pollution (particulate matter less than 2.5 μm in diameter [PM2.5] or ranging from 2.5 μm to 10 μm in diameter [PM10-2.5]), nitrogen dioxide (NO2), and ozone (O3) using estimates from a state-of-art spatiotemporal model with loss of independence.15-17 We focused on these pollutants because they are regulated by the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). Given that different sources, such as agriculture, traffic, power generation, windblown dust, and wildfires, emit PM2.5 with distinct physical and chemical characteristics, we also evaluated PM2.5 levels from key emission sources.
Methods
Study Population
This cohort study used data from the Health and Retirement Study (HRS), a nationally representative sample of people older than 50 years in the US. HRS and our use of linkages of HRS residential addresses to environmental measures through the Environmental Predictors of Cognitive Health and Aging (EPOCH) study were approved by the University of Michigan institutional review board. Informed consent was obtained from all respondents, and we followed the Strengthening the Reporting of Observational Studies in Epidemiology (STROBE) reporting guideline.
HRS began recruiting in 1992 and added new birth cohorts every 6 years,18 with interviews biennially. For respondents who died or those unable or unwilling to be interviewed, the study surveyed a spouse, child, or another proxy.19
We studied all respondents with at least 2 interviews between 1998 and 2016, when our air pollution estimates were available. To assess the incidence, we included only respondents who had not previously reported receiving help with activities of daily living (ADL) or instrumental activities of daily living (IADL) or living in a nursing home at baseline. We also excluded respondents with missing data on pollution, independence, or confounders (eFigure 1 in Supplement 1).
Identification of Incident Loss of Independence
We assessed new loss of independence at each interview for living respondents and in the last 3 months of life for respondents who had died. We classified loss of independence as newly receiving help in any ADL (ie, walking across the room, dressing, bathing or showering, eating, getting in or out of bed, and using the toilet) or IADL (ie, using the telephone, managing money, taking medications, grocery shopping, and preparing home meals) due to health or memory problems or moving to a nursing home.
In secondary analyses, we evaluated 2 mutually exclusive subcategories for lost independence: receiving assistance with at least 1 ADL item and receiving assistance solely with IADL or receiving no assistance but moving into a nursing home. We assumed that these 2 subtypes represented transitions from living independently to lost independence and receiving personal care.
Air Pollution Assessment
We used spatiotemporal models to estimate PM2.5, PM10-2.5, NO2, and O3 concentrations at all respondent residential addresses from 1990 to 201620,21 to assess mean exposures in the 10 years prior to each survey. These models incorporated regulatory monitor and research study network data, more than 300 geographic covariates, and spatial and temporal correlations to estimate mean concentrations at a 2-week resolution from 1999 to 2016 and an annual resolution from 1990 to 1999, when monitoring data for PM2.5 levels were more limited.20,22 With our interest in long-term exposures, we used year-round O3 level estimates instead of those for the warm season only. The cross-validation R2 for these models in most regions is greater than 0.80.20,23
We estimated source-specific concentrations of PM2.5 from agriculture, road traffic, nonroad traffic, energy from coal combustion, other energy, industry from coal combustion, other industry, wildfires, and windblown dust (eAppendix 1 in Supplement 1) by multiplying the total PM2.5 concentration at each residence by spatially resolved, fractional source-specific contributions of PM2.5.24 Briefly, these fractions were generated at a resolution of 0.5° × 0.625° from zero-out simulations in an atmospheric chemistry transport model (GEOS-Chem version 12.1.0).24 Although these models used 2017 emission data, we assumed that estimates reflected source contributions over the past decade given that 2017 emissions in the EPA National Emissions Inventory were strongly correlated with mean emissions from 2007 to 2017 for most sources (eFigure 2 in Supplement 1). We a priori focused on sources believed to have the most reliable emission information, as well as wildfires based on their increasing importance.
Covariates
Detailed information about respondent demographic characteristics and health was collected during each follow-up interview. This included age, sex, self-reported race and ethnicity (Hispanic, non-Hispanic Black, non-Hispanic White, and non-Hispanic other [eg, American Indian or Alaska Native, Asian, and Pacific Islander]), marital status (married/partnered or unmarried/unpartnered), number of children (0, 1, 2, 3, or ≥4 children), educational attainment (<high school, General Educational Development test, high school, some college, ≥college), ownership of a primary residence, total household wealth, urbanicity (urban, suburban, or rural), and neighborhood social economic status (NSES) level. Race and ethnicity were assessed because there are known differences in the outcomes by race and ethnicity and systemic disinvestment in communities have resulted in differential pollution exposure by these same characteristics. We defined NSES using 11 US Census variables, including population income, housing, and occupation.25 Chronic diseases were self-reported at each interview, including diagnosis of CVDs (heart problems, stroke, or transient ischemic attack), chronic lung diseases except asthma, and diabetes. We also assessed the maximum normalized difference vegetation index near respondent homes (250 m and 1000 m buffers) for the year of the interview as a measure of green space. Annual mean temperatures were estimated for each respondent using state-level data from the Comparative Climactic Data center.
Statistical Analysis
We used generalized estimating equation Poisson regression to examine the association of 10-year mean air pollution levels with loss of independence26 while accounting for person-level sampling weights, geographic strata, and sampling clusters. Our primary analysis estimated risk ratios (RRs) for loss of independence per 1-IQR increase in concentration of each pollutant from single-pollutant models. Then, in 2-pollutant models for PM10-2.5, NO2, and O3 levels, we additionally adjusted for total PM2.5 levels. Whereas 2-pollution models focused on source-specific PM2.5 levels, we included the sum of PM2.5 levels from all other sources. Lastly, we included all other pollutants (ie, PM10-2.5, NO2, and O3) in multipollutant models. We modeled source-specific PM2.5 levels as main effects instead of using the fractional source contributions as an effect modifier to allow for residential moves over time.
In all models, we adjusted for potential confounders, including baseline age, birth year, calendar date of interview, sex, race and ethnicity, marital status, number of children, educational attainment, ownership of primary residence at baseline, total household wealth at baseline fitted by natural splines with 5 degrees of freedom to account for potential nonlinearity, urbanicity, and NSES at each interview. We included multiple time-related variables because air pollution concentrations follow secular trends, age is a factor associated with high risk of loss of independence, and HRS