Log In
Events
Search
Weather and Climate @ Reading
Latest news from the Department of Meteorology
Skip to content
Home
← Older posts
Newer posts →
What’s happening in the Arctic sky?
Posted on 15 February, 2016 by Stephen Burt
By Michaela Hegglin
Meteorologists may say clouds are all about weather, but they sure aren’t, or at least not all of them! This late winter, people watching the sky in northern England witnessed spectacular appearances of nacreous clouds, also referred to as mother-of-pearl clouds (see Figure 1). Nacreous/mother-of-pearl is used to describe the inner, hard, and iridescent layer of certain seashells, and that is exactly how nacreous clouds in the sky look – shining like pearls. The more technical name is polar stratospheric clouds (PSCs), which tells us where these clouds can be found. PSCs are located in the polar stratosphere at altitudes between 15 and 25 km. They become visible to the human eye when the Sun is below the horizon, with sunlight being reflected from the clouds at very low angles. PSCs form at very low temperatures (below -78° C), encountered in the polar stratosphere only during winter. The main reason they occur at such low temperatures is the very small water vapour concentrations in the air (only 5 out of 1 million air molecules are water molecules). Despite their beauty, however, PSCs have a nasty side to them — they can severely enhance stratospheric ozone loss. This is the reason for the Antarctic ozone hole.
  Figure 1: Polar stratospheric clouds (PSCs) as photographed in January 2016 near Tromsø, Norway. (courtesy Geir Braathen, World Meteorological Organization, Geneva). More PSC photographs on the Cloud Appreciation Society website
Chemically, there are two different types of PSCs. Type I PSCs form at temperatures below -78° C and consist of nitric acid trihydrate (NAT = [HNO3•3*H­2O]) particles. Type II PSCs form at even lower temperatures (below -85° C) and consist of pure water-ice crystals (H2O). The formation rate is also dependent on the availability of condensation nuclei such as liquid sulphuric aerosol or meteoritic material. Volcanic eruptions that lead to the injection of sulphur oxides into the lower stratosphere for example can strongly enhance the availability of such condensation nuclei and hence the formation of PSCs. Because temperatures in the southern hemisphere polar winter stratosphere are generally lower than in the northern hemisphere, PSCs occur more extensively in the southern hemisphere. This northern hemisphere winter has, however, seen temperatures much below the PSC-type I formation threshold value from early December through January, extending over an area of more than 15 million square kilometres at times (see Figure 2).
  Figure 2: (upper) 50°N-90°N Arctic minimum temperature at 50 hPa averaged over 1979-2014 (light grey) with 70% and 90% percentiles highlighted in light and dark turquoise. Coloured lines show different years, with red being the winter of 2015/16. (lower) Integrated area where PSC formation is possible in the Northern Hemisphere. Here the average is in blue, the 2015/16 winter in orange. (WMO Bulletin, 2016)
It’s on the surface of PSCs that chemical reactions occur in which reservoir species of chlorine (such as HCl and ClONO2, which are not reactive enough to be involved in ozone depletion) are converted into Cl2. In spring, with the help of sunlight, Cl2 is split into single reactive chlorine atoms (Cl). Cl is involved in the catalytic cycles that lead to efficient ozone destruction, with one Cl atom being estimated to destroy up to 100,000 ozone molecules over its lifetime (see Figure 3).
Figure 3: Catalytic cycle of chlorine (Cl) that leads to ozone (O3) destruction. In a first step, a chlorine atom reacts with O3, forming a chlorine monoxide (ClO) and an oxygen molecule (O2). In a second step, the ClO reacts with an oxygen atom (O), regenerating the Cl and thereby starting the cycle anew. (Hegglin et al., WMO 2015)
Given the large area in the polar stratosphere over which PSC-formation temperatures have been recorded this year, and extensive observations of PSCs in the Northern sky, the big question for stratospheric ozone scientists now is, will we experience a record-ozone hole over the Arctic once the sunlight returns in spring?
The question has no definitive answer as yet, which is why a whole army of scientists is currently in the polar circle with their instruments ready to measure ozone depletion, while others are eagerly studying meteorological forecasts. The key ingredient to the development of severe ozone loss is in fact meteorology. It will be crucial that the air masses that experienced activation of Cl2 remain isolated from mid-latitude air until they see sunlight that will form Cl and start the catalytic destruction cycle seen in Figure 3. If mid-latitude air is mixed into the polar regions too early then the chlorine atoms can get deactivated by reactions involving nitrogen oxides (NOx) or hydrogen oxides (HOx) before ozone destruction can take place. Continued isolation of the polar air masses will occur if the polar vortex (strong circumpolar winds delineating the area of low temperatures and high potential vorticity, see Figure 4) remains intact for another couple of weeks. While a stable vortex is currently still present (and some ozone depletion has already taken place), forecasters see some probability of rising temperatures and even a sudden stratospheric warming, which could lead to rapid decay of the vortex. Let’s keep our eyes on the sky!
Figure 4: (left) ECMWF analysis of temperature and potential vorticity (PV) on 26 January 2016, along with ozone and (middle) HNO3, HCl, and ClO+2Cl2O2 maps at around 40 hPa on 31 January 2016. Air depleted in HNO3 and HCl within the polar vortex region are a sign of chlorine activation (as seen in enhanced ClO+2Cl2O2 values in lowermost panel). (right) For comparison, corresponding constituents maps on 1 December –  reflecting conditions before chemical reactions on PSCs have taken place – are also shown. (courtesy Geir Braathen, World Meteorological Organization, Geneva)
  Posted in Atmospheric chemistry, Polar | Tagged ozone hole, polar stratospheric clouds | Leave a comment
Wrap up well for St Valentine’s Day – a good chance of snow!
Posted on 8 February, 2016 by Stephen Burt
By Roger Brugge
The days are getting longer, the nights are getting shorter, but the temperature keeps falling – and so does the snow. At least in the climatological statistics they do!
Looking at the date of occurrence of the lowest temperature of the year over the past 108 years in Reading (Figure 1) we find that the average date of the coldest night is 16 January (with the dates of 18 December to 14 February lying within one standard deviation of this date). The complete spread of dates is rather more than might be expected, from as early as 13 November (‑5.3 °C in 1921) to as late as 5 April (-3.3 °C in 1990).
Figure 1. A histogram of the date (day of the year) of the lowest temperature each year from 1908 to 2015 in Reading.
The year 1921 had seen a lack of low temperatures during the first three months of the year (down to -3.1 °C in January, but then came three air frosts and three days with snowfall in mid‑April) while in 1990 there were four mornings with an air frost in April – a monthly total only surpassed that year by December (9 mornings).
Thus, in terms of the lowest temperature of the year, the first week of February (days 32-38) is beginning to show signs that the coldest night is past – but there can still be a sting in the tail of winter for gardeners.
What does the average daily temperature tell us? Defined as average of the highest and lowest temperatures of the day, the evolution of this by day during winter and spring is shown in Figure 2.
Figure 2. Daily mean temperature in Reading averaged over 1981-2010, from 1 November to 30 April.
This shows a notable dip around mid-February, with the 14th being (on average) the coldest day of the winter, and the only day in the year when the mean minimum temperature in Reading falls below the critical 0°C mark. What does that say about St Valentine’s Day?
Moreover there is also a peak in the incidence of snowfall at this time of year – snow or sleet fell eight times in the 30 years 1981-2010 on 8 February, with seven occurrences on the 9th. Statistically, this makes 8 February the most like day of the year to experience snowfall in Reading while 9 February is as likely to see snowfall as 7 January. Perhaps not surprisingly, 9 February is the morning most likely of any during the year to have snow cover on the ground at 0900 GMT.
So don’t put those sledges back in the loft just yet!
And finally …
Interested in local weather? Come along and learn more at this week’s University Public Lecture, One hundred years years of Reading’s weather by Stephen Burt and Roger Brugge on 10 February 2016 at the University of Reading. This illustrated lecture tells the story of Reading’s weather over the past hundred years and more using a combination of archived logbooks, contemporary photographs and today’s sophisticated automatic weather measuring equipment. Pre-registration essential – booking details here.
  Posted in Climate, Historical climatology, Measurements and instrumentation, University of Reading | Tagged climatology, Public Lecture, Reading weather | Leave a comment
The driving mechanism of large-scale unsteady currents in the ocean
Posted on 1 February, 2016 by Stephen Burt
By Antoine Hochet
During the last twenty years, measurements of the ocean surface properties by satellite instruments have significantly increased our knowledge of ocean dynamics.
One of these instruments is an altimeter that measures the topography of the ocean surface with a resolution of a quarter of degree. This surface topography can be decomposed into two fields: a mean field independent of time, plus an anomaly field. The mean field is the signature of the mean oceanic circulation, such as the well-known Gulf Stream, but here we only focus on the anomalies. An example of what the anomaly field looks like  is shown in Figure 1. On this figure positive and negative anomalies are observed with very different spatial scales: some are large, others are small. The small scales, called mesoscales, range from 50 to 200 or 300 km and are associated with eddies whose driving mechanism is an instability of the mean currents. This is a remarkable property of geophysical fluids: under certain circumstances, the mean currents can spontaneously creates small scale anomalies.
Figure 1. Snapshot of sea surface height anomalies (in centimetres) on 14 October 1992
Here we are interested in larger scales, between 500 and 2000 km. At these scales, non-linearities that were previously very strong can now be neglected, currents behave linearly. It is generally agreed that the large-scale anomalies are observed in every oceanic basins and that their displacement velocity is directed to the west. One exception is in the Antarctic Circumpolar Current where the mean flow is so strong toward the east that the large scale anomalies move eastward as well. The dynamic of these large-scale anomalies is usually described as Rossby waves. Rossby waves owe their existence to the meridional variation of the Coriolis force which is itself the result of the sphericity and rotation of the Earth.
What are the driving mechanisms of these Rossby waves ?
The two main mechanisms that are usually used to explain Rossby waves formation are large-scale wind anomalies and propagating waves along eastern coasts. In fact, Rossby waves are the main response of the ocean to large-scale forcing, and as such, any process that introduces a large-scale perturbation in the ocean is likely to produce Rossby waves.
Here we ask ourselves if large-scale instability of the mean currents can create Rossby waves.
We saw above that instability of the mean currents mostly creates mesoscale anomalies with scales between 50 and 200 or 300 km. In fact instability creates anomalies at all scales but the growth is generally faster at small scales than at larger scales. However if the growth is faster at small scales it is not zero at large scales. Here we first investigate the rate of this large-scale growth