Journals
Books
Sign in through your institution
Issues
Advance Articles
Submit
Purchase
Alerts
About
Journal of Applied Microbiology
This issue
Applied Microbiology International Journals
Microbiology
Books
Journals
Oxford Academic
Advanced Search
Volume 106 Issue 5
1 May 2009
< Previous
Next >
JOURNAL ARTICLE
How much ozone bactericidal activity is compromised by plasma components? Get access
S. Burgassi,
I. Zanardi,
V. Travagli,
E. Montomoli,
V. Bocci
Journal of Applied Microbiology, Volume 106, Issue 5, 1 May 2009, Pages 1715–1721, https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2672.2008.04141.x
Published: 01 May 2009 Article history
Cite
Permissions
Share
Abstract
Aims: Evaluation of bactericidal effect of different concentrations of ozone when used (a) as a gas, or (b) dissolved in saline. The addition of hydrogen peroxide or 4‐hydroxynonenal dissolved in saline was also tested, as well as the effect of human plasma.
Methods and Results:  Staphylococcus aureus, methicillin‐resistant Staph. aureus (MRSA), and Pseudomonas aeruginosa, suspended in their culture media were tested. While all bacteria suspended in protein‐free saline were killed at high ozone concentrations, they survived when as little as 5% human plasma was present. Hydrogen peroxide was 100‐fold less active than ozone and needed to remain in contact with bacteria for at least 60 min. 4‐hydroxynonenal (2 μmol l−1) was inhibitory for proliferation of both Staph. aureus and MRSA, but not for Ps. aeruginosa.
Conclusions: Ozone and the cascade of its derivative products are potent bactericidal agents, but even small amounts of human plasma, hence of hydro‐ and liposoluble antioxidants, in bacterial suspensions inhibit oxidation and protect bacteria.
Significance and Impact of the Study: Any substantial in vivo cytocidal effect of ozone and its derivatives can be excluded. On the other hand, topical and continuous action of various ozone preparations remains valuable in a variety of skin and mucosal infections.
4‐hydroxynonenal, bactericidal activity, disinfection, hydrogen peroxide, ozone, plasma antioxidants
Issue Section: Original Articles
© 2009 The Society for Applied Microbiology
This article is published and distributed under the terms of the Oxford University Press, Standard Journals Publication Model (https://academic.oup.com/journals/pages/open_access/funder_policies/chorus/standard_publication_model)
You do not currently have access to this article.
Sign in
Get help with access
Applied Microbiology International members
Sign in through society site
Personal account
Sign in with email/username & password
Get email alerts
Save searches
Purchase content
Activate your purchase/trial code
Add your ORCID iD
Sign in
Register
Institutional access
Sign in through your institution
Sign in with a library card
Sign in with username/password
Recommend to your librarian
Institutional account management
Sign in as administrator
Purchase
Subscription prices and ordering for this journal
Purchasing options for books and journals across Oxford Academic
Short-term Access
To purchase short-term access, please sign in to your personal account above.
Don't already have a personal account? Register
How much ozone bactericidal activity is compromised by plasma components? - 24 Hours access
EUR €48.00 GBP £41.00 USD $51.00
Rental
This article is also available for rental through DeepDyve.
CITATIONS
46
VIEWS
47
ALTMETRIC
More metrics information
Email alerts
Article activity alert
Advance article alerts
New issue alert
In progress issue alert
Receive exclusive offers and updates from Oxford Academic
Citing articles via
Web of Science (43)
Google Scholar
Latest
Most Read
Most Cited
The microbiological quality of flour products in the UK with respect to Salmonella and Shiga-toxin-producing E. coli (STEC)
Exploring the Effects of Saorilao-4 on the Gut Microbiota of Pulmonary Fibrosis Model Rats Based on 16S rRNA Sequencing
Effect of plasma-activated water on planktonic and biofilm cells of Vibrio parahaemolyticus strains isolated from cutting board surfaces in retail seafood markets
Immunoinformatic approaches for ErpY-LemA chimeric protein design for use in leptospirosis control
Assessment of crAssphage as a biological variable for SARS-CoV-2 data normalization in wastewater surveillance
More from Oxford Academic
Biological Sciences
Microbiology
Science and Mathematics
Books
Journals
About the Journal of Applied Microbiology
Editorial Board
Author Guidelines
Recommend to Your Librarian
Advertising and Corporate Services
Journals Career Network
Online ISSN 1365-2672 Print ISSN 1364-5072 Copyright © 2024 Applied Microbiology International
About Oxford Academic
Publish journals with us
University press partners
What we publish
New features 
Authoring
Open access
Purchasing
Institutional account management
Rights and permissions
Get help with access
Accessibility
Contact us
Advertising
Media enquiries
Oxford University Press
News
Oxford Languages
University of Oxford
Oxford University Press is a department of the University of Oxford. It furthers the University's objective of excellence in research, scholarship, and education by publishing worldwide
Copyright © 2024 Oxford University Press Cookie settings Cookie policy Privacy policy Legal notice
Oxford University Press uses cookies to enhance your experience on our website. By selecting ‘accept all’ you are agreeing to our use of cookies. You can change your cookie settings at any time. More information can be found in our Cookie Policy.
Reject and manage
Accept all