Loading [MathJax]/jax/output/HTML-CSS/config.js
Your privacy, your choice
We use essential cookies to make sure the site can function. We, and our 209 partners, also use optional cookies and similar technologies for advertising, personalisation of content, usage analysis, and social media.
By accepting optional cookies, you consent to allowing us and our partners to store and access personal data on your device, such as browsing behaviour and unique identifiers. Some third parties are outside of the European Economic Area, with varying standards of data protection. See our privacy policy for more information on the use of your personal data. Your consent choices apply to springer.com and applicable subdomains.
You can find further information, and change your preferences via 'Manage preferences'.
You can also change your preferences or withdraw consent at any time via 'Your privacy choices', found in the footer of every page.
We use cookies and similar technologies for the following purposes:
Store and/or access information on a device
Personalised advertising and content, advertising and content measurement, audience research and services development
Accept all cookies
Reject optional cookies
Manage preferences
Skip to main content
Log in
Find a journal
Publish with us
Track your research
Search
Cart
Home Clinical Oral Investigations Article
The adjunctive use of antimicrobial photodynamic therapy, light-emitting-diode photobiomodulation and ozone therapy in regenerative treatment of stage III/IV grade C periodontitis: a randomized controlled clinical trial
Research
Open access
Published: 12 July 2024
Volume 28, article number 426, (2024)
Cite this article
Download PDF
You have full access to this
open access
article
Clinical Oral Investigations
Aims and scope
Submit manuscript
Deniz Ozbay Cetiner, Sila Cagri Isler, Rahsan Ilikci-Sagkan, Janset Sengul, Ozlem Kaymaz & Ahu Uraz Corekci 
245 Accesses
Explore all metrics
Abstract
Objectives
To assess the short-term efficacy of multiple sessions of antimicrobial photodynamic therapy (aPDT), light-emitting-diode (LED) photobiomodulation, and topical ozone therapy applications following surgical regenerative treatments on clinical parameters, patient-centered outcomes, and mRNA expression levels of VEGF, IL-6, RunX2, Nell-1, and osterix in gingival crevicular fluid samples in patients with stage III/IV, grade C periodontitis.
Materials and methods
Forty-eight systemically healthy patients were assigned into four groups to receive adjunctive modalities with regenerative periodontal surgical treatment. A 970 ± 15 nm diode laser plus indocyanine-green for aPDT group, a 626 nm LED for photobiomodulation group, and topical gaseous ozone were applied at 0, 1, 3, and 7 postoperative days and compared to control group. The clinical periodontal parameters, early wound healing index (EHI), and postoperative patients’ morbidity were evaluated. The mRNA levels of biomarkers were assessed by real-time polymerase chain reaction.
Results
No significant difference in the clinical parameters except gingival recession (GR) was identified among the groups. For group-by-time interactions, plaque index (PI) and probing pocket depths (PD) showed significant differences (p = 0.034; p = 0.022). In sites with initial PD > 7 mm, significant differences were observed between control and photobiomodulation groups in PD (p = 0.011), between control and aPDT, and control and photobiomodulation groups in CAL at 6-month follow-up (p = 0.007; p = 0.022). The relative osterix mRNA levels showed a statistically significant difference among the treatment groups (p = 0.014).
Conclusions
The additional applications of aPDT and LED after regenerative treatment of stage III/IV grade C periodontitis exhibited a more pronounced beneficial effect on clinical outcomes in deep periodontal pockets.
Similar content being viewed by others
Photodynamic therapy decrease immune-inflammatory mediators levels during periodontal maintenance
Article 04 October 2016
Indocyanine green–mediated antimicrobial photodynamic therapy as an adjunct to periodontal therapy: a systematic review and meta-analysis
Article Open access
12 March 2021
Clinical and microbiological efficacy of indocyanine green-based antimicrobial photodynamic therapy as an adjunct to non-surgical treatment of periodontitis: a randomized controlled clinical trial
Article Open access
31 January 2023
Introduction
According to the 2017 World Workshop classification, stages III or IV, grade C periodontitis, formerly defined as aggressive periodontitis, is characterized by the rapid progression of a particularly severe form of periodontal disease [1]. Its advanced and rapidly progressing tissue destruction pattern and the poorly elucidated mechanism of host response make the clinical management of this form more complex [2]. The current EFP S3-Level Clinical Practice Guideline recommended the use of adjunctive measures such as systemic antibiotics for this specific patient category [3, 4]. Indeed, taking into account the public health concern related to the increase in antibiotic resistance and the efficacy of site-specific infection/inflammation management strategies, local application of antimicrobials, photo/mechanical and physical means can provide benefits to conventional periodontal treatment [2, 3, 5, 6].
Favorable outcomes of adjunctive interventions to non-surgical mechanical instrumentation in young individuals with grade C periodontitis have been indicated in several studies [7,8,9]. However, subgingival instrumentation, with or without adjunctive therapies, has been suggested to be insufficient in patients with deep periodontal pockets [3]. Therefore, surgical periodontal therapies incorporated with regenerative procedures may be required to eliminate deep residual pockets, reconstruct the intrabony part of the defects, and prevent tooth loss [3]. Regenerative surgical procedures have been shown to be efficacious for the treatment of intrabony defects in patients with severe periodontitis, with the rapid rate of progression [10].
Within the visible red or near-infrared (NIR) range of the spectrum (600 to 700 nm and 780 to 1100 nm), low-level lasers (LLL) or light-emitting-diodes (LEDs) have been widely utilized as an adjunct therapy for periodontitis treatment based on their photobiomodulation and decontamination effects, which primarily occur at the level of cellular respiratory chain [11, 12]. These modalities promote mitochondrial activity and activate the mechanisms, i.e., inducing intracellular metabolic changes, enhancing the cellular resuscitation system, and increasing adenosine triphosphate (ATP) and extracellular matrix (ECM) production [11, 13]. LLLs or LEDs in conjunction with photosensitizing agents (optical absorption dye) have been referred to as antimicrobial photodynamic therapy (aPDT). This procedure stimulates the dye to form free radicals of singlet oxygen that will act as toxic to the target cells or bacteria mainly as a result of deterioration to the cytoplasmic membrane and DNA, [14] thereby demonstrating anti-microbial activity at periodontal pathogenic bacteria in combination with periodontal treatment [15]. It has also been noted to have an impact on vascularization and new bone formation by modulating or activating cell metabolism in the surrounding tissues through photobiomodulation [16, 17]. Similar to the biostimulatory features of LLLs or LEDs, gaseous ozone therapy applications have been recently exploited because of their analgesic, immunomodulatory, and anti-inflammatory effects, which may have the ability to provide significant added benefits in periodontal healing [18, 19]. However, in the literature, limited information exists regarding the efficacy of these modalities adjunct to the periodontal regenerative therapies on the processes and sequences of the healing and, consequently, in the postoperative expression levels of inflammation, angiogenesis, and osteogenesis biomarkers. Therefore, the objectives of the present study was: (i) to investigate the additional influence of multiple sessions of aPDT, LED photobiomodulation, and topical gaseous ozone therapy applications associated with surgical regenerative treatments by using an allogenic bone graft in combination with a collagen membrane on clinical and patient-centered outcomes in patients with stage III/IV, grade C periodontitis, and (ii) to analyze mRNA expression levels of vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), interleukin − 6 (IL-6), runt-related transcription factor 2 (RunX2), NEL-like 1 (Nell-1), and osterix in gingival crevicular (GCF) samples at baseline and the 1-, 3- and 6-month follow-ups after the treatment procedures. The null hypothesis of the study was that aPDT, LED photobiomodulation, and topical gaseous ozone would provide the same clinical attachment level (CAL) values as the regenerative treatment without any local adjunctive applications (control group).
Materials and methods
Study design and patient selection
The present study was a single-blinded, parallel-group, superiority randomized controlled clinical trial (ClinicalTrials.gov identifier: NCT05447026) with a 6-month follow-up and compliant with the principles of the Helsinki Declaration of 1975, as revised in 2013. The protocol was approved by the Clinical Investigation Ethics Committee of Ankara University’s Faculty of Dentistry (ID 36290600/105) and also the Republic of Turkey Ministry of Health, Turkey Pharmaceuticals and Medical Devices Agency (No: 71146310-511.06-E.199,784 Subject: 2017–064).
Patients diagnosed with localized/generalized periodontitis stage III or IV, grade C at the Department of Periodontology, Faculty of Dentistry, Gazi University, between January 2019 and May 2021, were considered eligible for this study. A detailed information sheet about the study was given to all participants, and written informed consent was obtained before their participation.
The patients exhibited the following clinical and radiographic features: the presence of at least two non-adjacent interproximal sites with interdental CAL ≥ 5 mm, probing pocket depths (PD) ≥ 6 mm, radiographic bone loss extending to mid-third of root or beyond, and bleeding on probing (BOP) ≥ 30%. Patients were considered the generalized type of periodontitis in case of the presence of 30% or more of the teeth had CAL ≥ 5 mm [1]. Regarding the periodontitis grade, patients with bone loss/age coefficient > 1.0 were assigned as grade C [1].
The following inclusion criteria were used: 1) ≤ 35 years of age; 2) presence of ≥ 12 teeth distributed in all four quadrants; 3) presence of residual periodontal pockets [i.e., probing depth (PD) ≥ 6 mm] 2 months after the completion of step 1 and 2 periodontal treatment 4) presence of inter-proximal defects on a single-rooted tooth or molars in either the maxilla or the mandible without extension to the furcation area and associated to an intrabony defects of ≥ 3 mm as detected in periapical radiographs (contained or non-contained defects); 5) full-mouth plaque score (FMPS) and full-mouth bleeding score (FMBS) ≤ 20%; 6) absence of degree 2 or 3 mobility.
The exclusion criteria were as follows: (1) females that were pregnant or breastfeeding; (2) systemic disease that could affect the risk or progression of periodontal disease, such as uncontrolled diabetes mellitus (haemoglobin A1c ≥ 7.0%); (3) medications that significantly impact periodontal inflammation and bone metabolism (i.e., bisphosphonates, selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors [SSRIs], proton pump inhibitors [PPIs], calcium channel blockers (CCBs), benzodiazepines, and corticosteroids); (4) smokers or use of other tobacco products; (5) systemic antimicrobial treatment (up to 3 months prior study inclusion); and (6) undergoing periodontal surgery at the experimental sites.
Study groups, randomization and allocation
All patients received steps 1 and 2 of periodontal therapy according to the S3 level guideline, [3] including proper oral hygiene practices, risk factor control, and supra- and subgingival instrumentation. Three months after the completion of these treatments, the response to second step of therapy was assessed, and surgical procedures with adjunctive therapies were performed in the presence of residual pockets (PD ≥ 6 mm with BOP). Patients were randomly assigned to one of the adjunctive treatment modalities utilizing a computer-generated random block design by the biostatistician of the study (O.K).
According to the treatment strategies, the patients were randomly divided into four groups: (i) Control group, (ii) aPDT group, (iii) Photobiomodulation group, and (iv) Ozone group.
Each patient was assigned a study code by a researcher (AU), who was masked for the treatment procedures, clinical measurements, and sample collections. Opaque-sealed envelopes with the allocation groups were opened at the end of surgery by the surgeon, and adjunctive treatments were performed.
Surgical approaches
The surgical procedures were performed by the same experienced researcher (S.C.I.), and were identical for all the study groups. Following local anesthesia, the experimental sites were treated with a simplified papilla preservation technique [20] to access all tooth surfaces for adjunctive measures. Granulation tissue was removed, and direct instrumentation of the affected root surfaces was performed under saline irrigation. Intrabony defects were filled with granules of allograft bone material (Maxgraft® cancellous granules, Botiss Biomaterials GmbH, Berlin, Germany, part of Straumann Group, Basel, Switzerland) and covered with a native porcine pericardial collagen membrane (Jason®, Botiss Biomaterials). The flaps were repositioned and sutured without any tension in order to achieve primary closure of the inter-dental area using a 5 − 0 mono-filament non-resorbable PTFE suturing material (Profimed, Medipac® Kilkis, Greece).
The following measurements were recorded at the time of surgery upon completion of intrasurgical debridement: (1) the thickness of the primary flap, evaluated at 1.5 mm apical to the coronal border of the flap with a caliper (Alpha Tools Digital Caliper, Mannheim, Germany) accurate to the nearest 0.1 mm; [21] (2) intrabony defect type (2- or 3-walled defects or combinations); (3) defect depth, the distance from the bone crest to the bottom of the bone defect; (4) defect width, the distance from the most coronal point of the bony walls surrounding the defect to the root surface; (5) the distance between CEJ and the bottom of the defect; and (6) the distance between CEJ and the coronal part of the defect.
Postoperative instructions
All included patients received the same written postoperative treatment instructions, and the postoperative care consisted of using mouth